[2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | ‘. 7 “ OGC 74-1755 SECRET 30 September 1974 MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD SUBJECT: Meeting with E. Howard Hunt Re His Memoirs, "Undercover" 1.. On 28 September 1974 Ray Rocca, Deputy Chief/CI Staff, © and I met in the DCD Washington Field Office with E. Howard Hunt, his attorney William A. Snyder, Jr., and Snyder's associate Thomas W. Coons. As the meeting began, Hunt asked if it was | being tape-recorded; I assured him that it was not. He said he did not care; but that, if it were to be recorded, he would like to know. We then embarked upon the review according to the plan under which © we would demand the deletion of three items as classified and then proceed to the remaining 29 items, only if Hunt was cooperative on the first three. He and his lawyers appeared very cooperative, and accordingly, the meeting continued to cover all 32 items. 2. Changes were agreed to in the items set forth in paragraphs 12, 14, and 25 of the CI Staff memorandum of 19 September 1974. These appear at pages 73, 80-83, and 115 of the galley proof and concern the fabrication of the Shanghai post for a Mexican operation, the entry into the Guatemalan: Embassy in Mexico City, and the joint) _CIA-Urugtayan telephone monitoring: operation. The wording of the agreed changes is as shown on the attached copies of the pertinent pages of the galley proof. Essentially, these changes disguise the identity of the fabricated newspaper and remove a reference to journalists as agents; delete the word "Guatemalan" to make the entered embassy non-specific; and delete the reference to listening posts and telephone monitoring to make that paragraph refer in more general terms to our ability to cover targets without referring to the use of electronic surveillance. E-2 IMPDET CL BY 058473 SEGRET Cc] 14-00000 | SECRET 3. We then proceeded to the 29 items which we would like to see modified but which we could not consider classified. We made this clear to Hunt and went through them one by one, discussing our concern with each. Hunt contended that most of these items should . not be considered sensitive since they had been publicized extensively; in some cases confirmed in testimony; and, in the case of other items, the principals involved were dead. However, he agreed to changes in the items referred to in paragraphs 1, 3, 17, and 32 of the CI Staff memorandum of 19 September. These involve the deletions of the names of Henry Pléasants) and Frank Holcomb, both now retired under cover; a direct reference to joint operations with the . ‘British in Hong Kong: against China; and the wording of his reference to CIA alias documentation used by the Watergate burglars. The language of this last item will be changed so that it no longer leaves . the impression that the documentation was prepared by the Agency for this operation. : 4, When we had finished, Hunt and his lawyers emphasized as they had mentioned earlier in the meeting that it might be very difficult to get the publisher to agree to changes in the unclassified _ items. Mr. Snyder offered to present all of the items to the publisher for change without distinguishing between the classified and unclassi- fied items. He said he would do this without implying they were all classified. I felt it necessary to turn down his offer because of the risk of the publisher being unwilling to accept that many changes with the result that we would have to go back to him on the three classified items, thus presenting a situation similar to our retraction of previously demanded deletions in the Marchetti book. I think there would be some danger of the publisher using this in his adver- tising and through reviewers for publicity purposes. 5. As we were leaving, Hunt showed me what was described as a "comfort letter.'' This was a letter written by him to the. publishers on 17 May 1974 at the publisher's request which said that in his opinion nothing in the manuscript violated any agreement between himself and the CIA, nor would subject him to prosecution under the espionage laws. As the meeting was ending, Hunt expressed his hope that no publicity would be given to it and that the Agency would not issue any kind of a press release. In view of the Director's decision that we shall issue a press release, I took pains to persuade Hunt that public acknowledgment of the fact that we had reviewed his SECRET 14-00000 at SECRET manuscript would be in his interest as well as ours. He had referred more than once during the meeting to the need to avoid the appearance of "a bear hug"; in other words, collusion or cooperation between him and the Agency, leaving an inference that the book was designed to be a whitewash of CIA. In view of this, it was easy to convince Hunt that an Agency press release would be in his interest. I would note here, however, that both Mr. Rocca and I felt that Hunt and his lawyers were genuinely cooperative and that a press release which is too harsh or denigrates the book or Hunt's motives might be unfair and considered by him to be in bad faith. Hunt appears to retain admiration and respect for the Agency and seems convinced that nothing in his book will harm our operations or personnel. <T)\ < AN SN arise Re a Acting General Counsel Attachments ce: Acting DDO SAB/DDO DC/CI Staff O/Security Asst. to DCI Mr. Walter Pforzheimer c/ccs OGC:JDM:sin Original - OGC Subj: PUBLICATIONS 1 - Chrono : SECRET = fe;14-00000 __* 104-10106-10042) “| . (International Art Associates, gd.) : PO ae SeUney 20 October 1976 . _.. | RETURNTO-CIA . - a ob _"_’, Background Use Only ur. (Comet Me Steele,) President “Do Not Reproduce - of beax lr, Gteele,) . This document is intended to confirm discussions hela between ‘yourself, representing international Art Associates, Ltd}, hereinafter referred to aa the "Company"? and Mr. John J. Hurray, Jr., representing the Central Intelligence Agency. (CIA)... If it conforms to your - understanding of the agreement ‘Teached, kindly so acknowledge by signing below. — "1," You have agreed on behalf of tha Company to assist CIA by placing on retainer Mr. Richard T. Gibson at an annual, fee of $9,900 per annw, Thin fea will he paid to Mr. Gibson by the Conpany in monthly increments of $750 each. The Company will overtly negotiate a retainér contract with Mr. Gibson, which will make eminently clear that both are negotiating and concluding the contract a3 independent parties; that..the Company will. have no. obligation to withhold Federal, state or Social Security income ‘ taxes. 2. In consideration of the support rendered, CIA will pay the Company a fee of $10,000 per annum.:- Provision is made in this amount to offset any nominal expenses the firm incure in its overt associations or support of Mr. Gibson. ; , ' 3. CLA wil reimburse the Company in quarterly increments via « contrived contractual arrangement between the Company end a notional facility of CIA. Cancelled checks will serve aa adequate accounting for monies paid the Company.’ “4, Because of CIA's ‘interest in Mr. Gibson, it is requested that the Company neither offer Mr. Gibson bona. fide employment. nor accept any proposal of employment from him without prior consent of CIA for a period of two (2) years following termination of this agreement, E2IMPDET CL by: 063837 14-00000 zip 5. All information relating to this Agreement is classified secret. Both CIA and the Company agree that the most astringent safeguards will be taken to protect this information, including the existence of the agreement. Any information in any form that must be given to a third party by either CIA or the Company will --be done in strict conformance with the laws safeguarding national security information, and. only with full consultation between CIA and the Company... 6. This agreenent - is sttective 1 1 October 1976 and shall. remain in full effect for an indefinite period, subject to cancellation at any time upon sixty (60) days’ notice by either party thereto. : “The CIA wishes to express its appreciation for the manner in which you have received this request to perform a service related to the national security of the United States and for your personal acteation } thereto. : ‘CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY * Special Contracting Officer (tptermational Art: Associates, utd. ) Emmett M, Steele,) President Date;14-00000 104-10106-10143| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 . woe, HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS ha -- 7% HSCA “Request Ltr 8 May 1978 OLC 78-1573 FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME: INCLUSIVE DATES: Directorate of S § T Memo 22 June 1978 CUSTODIAL UNI T/LOCATION: ROOM: DELETIONS, IF ANY: DATE DATE RECEIVED {| RETURNED REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME) SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICI. 1-27.76 & roger Braxcey LS. Wrte> Sle 9G-QUL-7K NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE Ao ACSI assess" ee ee etd aha rbatinn” Ann ERR Top Secret ‘Hro:[ ame and'aooress | pare [initiats| Scott Breckgnridge, orc | | | (Security Classification) [2 | 6D15, Has. | ; [3], Si t—<“—sCsSsdS fat —“t;i‘“‘iT CT CONTROL NO. SC-01856-78 [JACTION sd —SDIRECT REPLY [S| PREPARE REPLY | Opy |__japprovat | [pispaTcH | RECOMMENDATION) [{comMENT [[FIWE Cid RETURN | [concurrence _|iwrormation YT“ sicnaTure | REMARKS: FROM: NAME, ADDRESS, AND PHONE NO. | | Handle Via ere 2? i BOMINT Channels Access to this document will be restricted to those approved for the following specific activities: Warning Notice Sensitive Intelligence Sources and Methods Involved NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION Unauthorized Di closure Subject to iminal Sanctions Top Secret (Security Classification) £2 IMPDET 14-0000 , © TOP SECRET'- EIDER - CHESS SC-01836-78 Copy_ 4 MEMORANDUM FOR: Office of Legislative Counsel ATTENTION : Scott Breckenridge SUBJECT : HSCA Request REFERENCE : HSCA Letter Dated 8 May 78, OLC 78-1573 1. (U) Reference requests access to information in six areas pertaining to the U-2 Project. As you know the U-2 Project files include about 150 boxes and over 650 reels of microfilm, all located at the Records Center. We have reviewed the shelf listing titles to identify pertinent files that might be responsive to the areas of request. The information requested covers an era and an organization which was not a part of this Directorate. As a result much of the corporate memory is no longer available and research of the files by current personnel is time consuming and requires almost a learning process. We have depended a great deal on the written History of the U-2 Project for leads to files and for information contained in this memorandum. 2. (U) The primary interest of reference refers to the U-2 Project, Detachment C, while stationed in Atsugi, Japan. Attached are replies keyed to the six areas in the HSCA letter. 3. (U) We realize that the information supplied by this memorandum does not fully respond to all the areas requested. Because of the broad and encompassing nature of some of the requests in the HSCA letter and the fact that our files are not organized to readily respond to such broad requests we request that the HSCA staff review the material and determine if their requests could be limited or narrowed in some way. Yue 4 Abid,\, Thomas G. Ward Acting Executive Officer Directorate of Science and Technology Attachments: As stated we May be downgraded to Unclassified when removed from attachment. CL BY: 469804 TOP SECRET - EIDER - CHESS 14-0000 TOP SECRET - EIDER - CHESS r . Attachment To: : SC-01836-78 SUBJECT: DDS&T Interim Reply to HSCA Request, 8 May 78, OLC 78-1573 General Background: Detachment C advance party of security and communication personnel departed the U.S. for Atsugi, Japan, on 20 February 1957, the second echelon of administrative personnel departed 4 March, and the main body of the detachment with two U-2 aircraft and equipment began deployment on 15 March. On 29 March Headquarters was notified that all personnel and equipment were on base. Operational readiness was forecast for the week of 8 April. Operating procedures and liaison had been accomplished with the following major U.S. components: Far East Air Force ,3-3 Far East Command and Theater Commander Agency's (Tokyo Station and local support unit 54th Weather Reconnaissance Squadron Atsugi Naval Air Station Details or specific operating agreements or procedures with the above components have not been located. By mid-May 1957 the Detachment had flown 30 sorties. All of these operations were preparations for the primary mission of the Detachment. The first primary mission of the Detachment, a flight over part of the USSR, occurred on 20 June 1957, however, this mission did not originate or recover at Atsugi. The first overflight of the USSR from Atsugi occurred on 1 March 1958 and this flight was the only and last flight. This flight, as other previous flights by other Detachments, was tracked by Russian radar, even though the U-2 aircraft had anti-radar applications, and a Soviet protest was made on 5S March 1958 by the Soviet Ambassador to Washington, Mikhail Menshikov. Attached are copies of the Soviet Aide Memoires of 5 March and 21 April 1958 (Tab A). . The Detachment continued to perform non-USSR missions in the Far East area until the Powers flight of 1 May 1960. Redeployment of the Detachment began in early July, the last U-2 aircraft departed Japan on 9 July and all personnel and other equipment cleared the base and turned the facilities back to the Navy on 19 August 1960. . ‘TOP SECRET - EIDER - CHESS UPd 14-00000 ho TOP SECRET '- EIDER - CHESS During the deployment of Detachment C it performed approximately 86 operational missions, of these only 43 originated and recovered at Atsugi. 1. Any and all information pertaining to the take- offs and landings of the U-2 at Atsugi, Japan, limited to the years 1959 through 1962. We have been unable to locate files which would contain logs of all take-offs and landings of the U-2 aircraft assigned to Detachment C. In addition to the mission flights stated above we must assume that there were a large number of take-offs and landings which would include flights for pilot familiarization, training, equipment testing, transitional and flights (purely for cover purposes 32 2. Any and all information concerning the radar : procedures, facilities, and staff involved with the U-2 flights at Atsugi, Japan, limited to the years 1959 through 1962. As stated in the General Background above we have not located details or specific operating procedures or agreements with the local Navy base at Atsugi. 3. Any and all information pertaining to contact between Marine Air Control Squadron #1, Air Group II, lst Marine Wing, and U-2 personnel at Atsugi, Japan, including but not limited to housing, recreational, and eating facilities - limited to the years 1959 through 1962. We have not identified any relationship between Detachment C and Marine Air Control Squadron #1. On the subject of housing, we have noted that late in 1957 families were permitted at Detachment C and as a result housing was provided in the compound assigned to the Agency Support Unit and ten houses were rented on the local market. 4. Any and all information pertaining to defectors with knowledge of the U-2 program. The DDS§T has not located any information pertaining to defectors. We defer this request to the DDO. -2- TOP SECRET - EIDER - CHESS 14-0000 / oo... TOP SECRET’ - EIDER - CHESS 5. Any and all information within the U-2 program file pertaining to defectors with knowledge of the U-2 program. See above. 6. Any and all information concerning Soviet knowledge of the U-2 program previous to May 1,.1960. Attached is an extract from a report dated 3 March 1958 concerning Soviet Air Defense which gives a summary of Soviet knowledge of the U-2 overflights between 20 June and 10 July 1956 (Tab B). Also attached is a copy of the Soviet protest note of 10 July 1956 concerning Mission 2013 on 4 July 1956 which was the first penetration of the Soviet borders (Tab C). TOP SECRET - EIDER - CHESS 14-0000 5 Maxch 1958 _ EMBASSY OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS AIDE MEMOIRE According to precisely established data, on March 2, 1958, at 4:05 hours Moscow time, an American military jet aircraft, having appeared from the direction of the Sea of Japan, violated the state torder of the Soviet Union in the area of the settlement of Velikaya Kema and penetrated into the airspace of the Soviet Union, remain- ing over its territory for a considerable period of time. Thereafter, the aircraft left in the direction of the Sea of Japan in the area south of the Olga Bay. The information on this ‘violation has been carefully checked and there is no doubt as to its authenticity. The military representa- tives of the United States, who in this case acted possibly without the knowledge of the Government of the United States, will perhaps deny the said violation, as has happened in the past. However, sucha denial cannot eliminate the fact of violation itself. In any case, the Soviet side would have no interest in commenting on this incident if it had not actually taken place. A the present time, when negotiations are being conducted on the holding of a summit meeting which could contribute to an im- provement of relations and to strengthening trust between states, the violation of the Soviet border by an American military aircraft may be evaluated as an attempt to undermine the efforts aimed at. convening such a meeting and to aggravate the international situation. From the messages of the President of the USA and his con- versations with the Soviet Ambassador, as well as from statements by other government officials of the USA, it is known to the Soviet Government that the Government of the USA desires a rapprochement between our governments and improvement in the relations between them. There can hardly be any doubt that such facts of violation of the borders of the USSR can have only one result--that of hindering this cause and upsetting Soviet-American relations. 14-0000 The attention of the Government of the USA is invited to the fact that in the present situation the violation of the airspace of the USSR by an American military aircraft takes on a particularly dangerous character since, as has been repeatedly reported, Ameri- can military planes make flights around the clock over many countries of the world carrying thermonuclear bombs. The Government of the USA cannot fail to be aware of what genuinely catastrophic consequences ‘for the cause of peace will ensue when an American plane with such a load will find itself shot down. The attention of the Government of the USA has already been previously directed to cases of violation of the state boundaries of the Soviet Union by American military aircraft. However, as proven by the case cited, the authorities of the USA have not taken the necessary measures to prevent such violations. It is absolutely obvious that it is the duty of the governments of the USSR and the USA to do everything possible to prevent any acts - . capable of complicating the situation and the relations between the Soviet Union and the USA. The Soviet Government cannot but protest against the violations of Soviet frontiers by. an American military aircraft and it expects that the Government of the United States will punish severely those guilty of the violation of the airspace of the USSR which has taken place and that it will take steps to prevent such violations in the future. Taking into account the present situation, where a summit con- ference is being prepared, and also the spirit and purpose of the nego— tiations being conducted between our governments, the Soviet Government would not like to make this matter public or subject it to discussion in the UN. The hope is expressed that this matter will be settled satisfac- torily between the governments of the USSR and the USA and that there will be no need for the Soviet Government to resort to other means for irs settlement. (initialled by M. Menshikov) Washington, March 5, 1958 14-0000 21 April 1958 EMBASSY OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS Note No. 9 The Embassy of.the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics presents its compliments to the Department of State of the United States of America and, referring to the Aide-Memoire of the Depart- ment of State dated March 31, 1958 and containing a reply of the Government of the United States of America to the Aide-Memoire of the Soviet Government dated March 5 concerning a violation of the Soviet state border in the Far East by an American military jet air-. craft, has the honor to communicate the following: In the reply Aide-Memoire of the Department of State an attempt is made to deny the fact of an American military aircraft . having violated the Soviet border. As has already been communicated, the Soviet Government has at its disposal carefully verified data on this violation, the reliability of which leaves no room for doubt. According to these data, on March 2, 1958, at 4:05 a.m. Moscow time, an American military reconnaissance aircraft of the Lockheed U-2 type, having appeared from the direction of the Sea of Japan, violated the state border of the Soviet Union in the area of the settlement Velikaya Kema, 32 kilometers south of that: settlement. Then the violating aircraft deeply penetrated the airspace of the USSR and, after remaining over its territory for a considerable period of time, passed beyond the limits of the Soviet territory 45 kilo- meters south of the Olga Bay at 8:ll a.m, In the light of the established facts the reply of the Government of the United States of America can in no way be recognized as satis- factory. Naturally, the question arises as to how to explain such a reply of the American Government: whether it was misled deliberately by its military representatives in the Far East or whether it considered it possible to protect such persons subordinate to it, who, without re- vard to the possible consequences, sanction violation of Soviet borders, thus creating a threat of international complications. 400000 ey Such a reply of the Government of the United States of America to the communication of the Soviet Government cannot fail to cause serious concern, the more so since the new case of violation of Soviet airspace took place after warnings on the part of the Government of the USSR to the effect that American authorities should take the necessary steps to prevent such violations. In connection with the foregoing the Soviet Government expects that the Government of the United States of America will undertake further investigation of this act of violation of the airspace of the USSR by an American military aircraft and will punish severely those guilty of this violation. The Soviet Government also expects that the Government of the United States of America will take the necessary steps to prevent violations of Soviet airspace by American aircraft in the future and _ states that in the event of new violations full responsibility for their consequences will rest with the Government of the United States. Washington, D. C.. April 1958 14-0000 . . t ’ , + . 14-0000 Looe HOP SECRET EIDE LEDS $0-02164_-58 Ey + Of Initial Missions period from 20 June to 10 July 1956 the Soviet Bloc air defense ubjected to eight penetrations of an unprecedented nature, seven thin a period of only eight days. It must be remembered that as the only basis of judging the performance of the Soviet nis is important because it is clear from REGAL material that °y ie air defense business is conducted over landlines and thus ase | OOMINT. However, some tentative conclusions may be érawn fr itial flights and these are indicated as follows: 1. In spite of the fact that these missions come es a surprise, none of them went undetected. This is clear evidence that their radar coverage extends above (72,000 eet. *4 mone - 236 yp. . TOP SECRET — EIDER— CHES ” a “- TS i - S0-02164.58 2. By 5 July 1956, the fourth flight, the USSR was avare of the purpose of the missions and were taking counter action. One positive action was the standdown of civil flights while the mission aircraft was over the USSR, and a sacond action which is believed related is the moving of MIG-19 aircraft into East Germany and Poland on 7 duly 1956. Also MIG-19's were moved ‘inte Hungary at about this time. - : ; 3- The performance of the Soviet system on the > July mis on, - 2014, was indeed curious. While the action evident tron(oounmne zy ' is not clear an explanation ‘Which appears to fit the known facts is offered as follows: As ® Yesult of the previous missions, the Soviets had cameluded the essential facts concerning the missions, 24 i.e., that they were for reconnaissance, that they flew above 6 000) feet, and that a Penetration as deep as Moscow Wes possible. They probably surmised that the > July mission was headed for Moscow when the track appeared on a northeasterly heading. The loss of the ™, target when it entered Soviet territory was Probably deliberate and the "red herring" track returning to the wast was either a dodge or @ convenience to avoid broadcasting a track for all the system to ses that a "hostile or intruder" was coming over Moscéw with no mcans available to stop it. This idea is supported by the use of a raid nwnber assigned in the region dust beyond the point 94 where the track had been "Lost". In addition, the track yes not dabeled “hostile or intruder" when it was broadeast after it - bad passed beyona Moscow. The reporting of the track when it did Sppear was only by Moscow and At has been suggested that other stations had been instructed not to broadcast the track. Further, it may or tay not be a coincidence that the height brozdcast was almost exactly half of the true altitude of the mission aircraft, but on the next missions » four days later 3» the altitude reporting was consistently rbove 50,000 Feet, : ™ hy By 9 July 1956, in addition to the evident recomition of the great height of the mission flights, tracking was better and in general the performance of the warning system was much improved. 5. The next day, 10 July 1956, the Soviet air defense warning [erste closed a 3000 mile track with only two short periods of ei ; confusion or track loss. Altitude reporting was over 60,000 feat q ; with one plot passed 68,800 wiich was only 100 feet off target. 6. The first eight missions proved that the air defense Warning systen is deployed in depth. This vas evident from both the continuity 7 ox track and most forcefully from the ELIW date collected. Some 1461 intercepts of Soviet Bloc radars operating in the 3000 me/s band were obtained by Project ELINT as follows: TOKET-1331, WHIET-37, GAGE-26, PATTY CAKE-37, Other 30. These numbers cannot be equated to in- 4 dividual radar sate since the same radar may be intercepted more than : Y once. 618 TOKEN sites were located, including 213 new sites. Some 343 additional TOKEN Signals were identified but available information aces not permit Catermination of location so that it must be con- cluded that these Signals include both known and nev sites. Because of the limitetion of ELINT to the 3000 me/s band and the Soviet Practice of collocating radars on difverent frequencies the total numer of radars may be expected to be et least double the number of sites. . : a, © 2h, a TOP SECRET—EIDER—cHEss — 14-0000 I om tUFr JOUNLE TT OVEN Mm UES io, . Oo / a SC-02161-58 resence of large numbers of fighters although the saturetion poin \ 7. Confusion and track loss seemed to be related to the ft (e not bsen determined because of insufficient data. “I | 8. The question of radars for height finding, the capabilities ) of TOKEN in this role, the introduction of ROCK CAKEs end later : aevelopments are discussed in enother section. It is believed, | however, that these missions were a catalyst in the introduction _/ | °* ROGK CAKEs. 49 elpy - 25 - TOP SECRET — EIDER—CHESS - Y lo YS power) (Text of Russian Protest: Unofficial Translation) Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ; 10 July 1956 Note No. 23 The Embassy of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics presents its compliments to the Department of State of the United States of America and, acting on in- structions from the Soviet Government, has the honor to state the following: According to precisely verified data, on July 4 of this year, at 8:18 a.m. Moscow Time, a twin-engined medium bomber of the United States Air Force appeared from the American Zone of Occupation in Western Germany and flew over the territory of the German Democratic Republic, entering” the air space of the Soviet Union from the direction of the Polish People's Republic at.9:35 in the area of Grodno. The aircraft which violated the air space of the Soviet Union flew on the route Minsk, Vilnyus, Kaunas and Kaliningrad, penetrating territory of the Soviet Union to the depth of 320 kilometers and remaining-over such territory for one hour and 32 minutes. On July 5 of this year, at 7:41 Moscow Time, a twin- engine medium bomber of the United States Air Force, coming from the American Zone of Occupation in Western Germany, fiew over the territory of the German Democratic Republic, and at 8:54 penetrated the air space of the Soviet Union in the area of Brest, coming from the direction of the Polish People's Republic. The aircraft violating the air frontier of the Soviet Union flew along the route Brest, Pinsk Bara-— novichi, Kaunas, and Kaliningrad, having penetrated Soviet territory to a depth of 150 kilometers and having remained one hour and 20 minutes over such territory. The same day another twin-engine bomber of the United States Air Force Department of State of the United States of America Washington, D. C. 14-00000 pe invaded the air space of the Soviet Union and penetrated to a significant depth over Soviet territory. On July 9 there took place new flights of United States aircraft into the Soviet air space. : : The above-mentioned violation of the air frontiers of the Soviet Union by American aircraft cannot be inter— preted as other than intentional and conducted for purp- oses of reconnaissance. : It must be underscored that these gross violations of - . the air space of the Soviet Union took place at a time ‘when, as a result of the efforts of the Soviet Union and other peace-loving governments, a definite lessening of international tensions has been achieved, when relations between governments are improving, and when mutual confi- dence between them is growing. Such a development of inter— national relations is fully supported by the peoples of all countries who are vitally interested in strengthening peace. One cannot, however, fail to recognize that reactionary circles hostile to the cause of peace in a number of coun-— tries are worried by the relaxation of international tension which has taken place. These circles do everything possible to interfere with further improvement of relations between countries and the creation of mutual trust among them. : Among such attempts is the said gross violation by the’ American Air Force of the air space of the Soviet Union, which consistently carries out a policy of strengthening peace and broadening businesslike cooperation with all countries, including the United States of America. In this connection, the fact attracts attention that the said violations of the air frontier of the Soviet Union by American aircraft coincided with the stay of General Twining, U. S. Air Force Chief of Staff, in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Soviet Government energetically protests to the Government of the United States against such gross viola-— tion of the air space of the Soviet Union by American mili-- tary aircraft and considers this violation. as an intentional act of certain circles in the United States, planned to ag- gravate relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. 14-0000 Calling the attention of the Government of the United States to the inadmissibility of such violations of the air space of the Soviet Union by American aircraft, the Soviet Government states that all responsibility for possible consequences of such violations rests with the Government of the United States. The Soviet Government expects that steps will be taken by the Government of the United States to punish those guilty for the said violations and to prevent such viola— tions in the future. Washington, D. C. July 10, 1956;14-00000 104-10106-10179) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | ° ws Backgroure Use 7 iw Net Resroc wae) MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD FROM: Robert D. Clark _ Office of General Counsel SUBJECT: “ : /*. PDLADLE: | Outside Lawyer to Draw Up Sle ae ot Deed of Trust us ir Lote 1. PDLADLE is a high-level defector residing in New York who has had advanced to him a number of large "loans" over the years, in addition to his "salary." Some of these monies have gone into the purchase of some real estate in the State of New York. The Agency now wants a Deed of Trust executed in favor of one of its nominees on the New York real property. 2. Possible lawyers to handle drafting the Deed of Trust are: ol . a. (Watalie Koether) a cleared N.Y. lawyer, on whom FR Division has an operational approval. They have an active interest in using her and her husband. If Ms. Koet eq is used on the Deed of Trust, FR would lose an asset. Were it not for our rule of no operational use of cleared attorneys, , . ER apparently (accordingly to Eric Sowers) has no objection " to(Ms. Koether'} drawing up the Deed of Trust; ce) b. another cleared lawyer. The clearance on any such lawyer would have to be updated by Security. The best candidate Bill Ashbaugh and I were able to locate off the Cleared Attorneys Panel was(Richard C. Kullen, Jr., OS #651 162, last cleared - 21 March 1975; 06,0 c. the case officer for PDLADLE, MONCURE, who is apparently a practicing N.Y. lawyer who at one time worked for the Agency. This idea was suggested by Vasia Gmirkin of CI Staff, the client component on the Deed of Trust. The idea would be that since MONCURE already knows that PDLADLE and MONCURE would be used only on this PDLADLE job, the security and. cover problems normally associated with allowing cleared attorneys to become involved in operations would not be as pronounced as “)pV 14-0000 ( Lay ey RETURN To Cin Background Use Onl S20 Not Repradues, oth usual. On the other hand, his prior association with the Agency could jeopardize PDLADLE if drafting the Deed of Trust exposes MONCURE to more scrutiny than his present association with PDLADLE already does; and : : d. an attorney from OGC. N.Y. mortgage law would have to be ; researched to try to make the Deed of Trust-freely assignable from .. " one CIA nominee to another. N.Y. form books should be easily \ locatable in the D.C..law libraries. If the Deed of Trust follows N Yo form, would the fact that the OGC lawyer is not licensed in N.Y. in any way throw doubt on the document? When might the name of the lawyer who drafted the document come to light? Robert D. Clark - RDC: kas Distribution: Original - DEFECTORS 1 - RDC Signer 1 - Chrono;14,0000 104-10106-10188) “ {2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT “yt _ : JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | a - sas ee ger RODUCE 1. Sam Jaffe's relationship with the Agency predates his assignment to Moscow as an ABC correspondent. During the period 1958-60 while in New York Jaffe was a confidential informant of the FBI on his Soviet contacts in New York. In addition, he had several meetings with the New York office of CIA's Domestic Contact Division. While in Moscow with ABC Jaffe felt he’ _ was the subject of a recruitment attempt by the KGB in 1962. He recounted _ his story to the Regional Security Officer at the American Embassy in Moscow, -- copies of which went to both CIA and FBI. Jaffe covered the Gary Powers' trial for ABC and flew on the same plane from New York to Moscow with the ee Barbara Powers' party. Prior to that trip he was briefed by a CIA psychologist on ways to observe Powers's behavior and demeanor. Jaffe was never "ordered" - to caver the Powers’ trial, but simply acted as an enterprising newspaperman - befriending Barbara Powers while her party was enroute and in the Soviet Union. — . "+" @L During the latter part of his time in Moscow Jaffe was in contact .:.° _ with a KGB officer, Kuvkov, and this relationship is a matter of record with | the FBI. ‘There is some evidence that Jaffe was given preferential treatment | by the Soviet authorities. Somé western pressmen felt that daffe,.as. an aggressive newspaperman, was giving a little to get a story. Jaffe has given his version of his dealings with the KGB in a lengthy 1969 interview with the FBI. -- a ae _.. |B. The defector Nosenko provided information on Jaffe's relationship —. to the KGB in 1964. However as time went on, further debriefings of Nosenko - indicated that Nosenko was. not as sure about Jaffe's relationship as he had been originally. By 1968 Nosenko was positive only that Kuvkov had been in <= touch with Jaffe, but Nosenko was not certain that Jaffe was a paid and «= witting agent of the KGB... 0.0 ee he was in touch with CIA officers. He provided good information on ajjChinese _ news officialljand he was-helpful to the Agency in reporting on a Canadian ]}| . organization, lie Committee of New China Policy} AN (official contact with Jaffe ended in 1971. - \ rr os OT ORT 4. During Jaffe's tour in‘Hong Kong, and subsequently in roma oo 24 . 5. Central to Jaffe's charges about CIA, which he has made public many times, is Jaffe's belief that the CIA passed derogatory information about him to his employers. Attached is a 24 November 1975 letter from Mr. Colby to Jaffe which states categorically that no information in the CIA files had ever been passed outside of official channels. In addition to this letter - daffe has been reassured on this point verbally on at least four other occasions.. The CIA is positive that Jaffe's recall from Hong Kong in 1968 HBR 14-00000 , and subsequent dismissal by ABC, are not related to any action taken by the CIA., , . . had with Mr.[ Ted Cowen, a British ‘intelligence official] in Hong Kong. 06/0% According to: atfe, Cowen) told him that he had a "security problem" but 0g this problem would clear up in due course. A close check of our files can not ellucidate what Cowen |was talking about. It is pgssible, of course, 06 that [Cowen] was alluding to the Nosenko allegations as|the British|were 9¢ it given much of the Nosenko debriefings. The record is Unclear on this ) point.. However, based on information available to this Agency, we feel we have tried to pacify Jaffe with the statement contained in the Colby letter that we have no evidence he has ever been an agent of any foreign intelligence service. oo : + 6. In [ted coven, with Jaffe he frequently recounts a conversation he 7. Jaffe has submitted a Freedom of Information Act request to CIA which has resulted in the release of a large number of documents to him. Jaffe can, of course, appeal our withholding of certain documents through appropriate administrative and judicial procedures under the FOIA. S16R;14,0000 104-10106-10194] [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 fan ( , 10 March 1978 Y peewee Cackorounc lan oY5 Nt rer aay MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD BS JOLNa8 Reproducs FROM: Robert D. Clark Office of General Counsel SUBJECT: Meeting in New York: PDLADLE On 2 March 1978, the undersigned and Vasia Gmerkin of CI Staff met in New York City with the defector 3i@@iRgmmmmeteand his wife S@iat the apartment of Bernard MONCURE. There (eae Beput a first mortgage on a New York City property of theirs located at 163 East 71st Street, New York, New York, in favor of a devised facility nominee of the Agency { Roush-Walker Company, 48 Alabama Street, S.W B Atlante, Georgia, for a recited indebtedness of $167,429.88. They signed e classified document acknowledging that the devised facility is an instrumentality of the United States Government. This document was witnessed in alias by Mr. Gmerkin and the undersigned ?OBBAD -egistered strenuous objections to the "mortgage." n, RDC: kas _-Robert D. Clark Distribution: : a Original - DEFECTORS 7 1 - RDC Signer 1 - Chrono a as 174 | 7 BNET CO Ree SECRET;14,0000 a 104-10106-10215| | 2025 RELEAS “SKY Oo) WW YoRK, COUNTY OF = "EW YORK SS: Onthe 2nd day of __ MARCH personally cage cee nda mB hisband and wife, - 1978, before me ta me known to be the individual g described in and who - executed the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged that they executed the same. . STATE OF HEW YORK, COUNTY OF . 3S: On the day of 19, before me personally came . to me known, who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say that he resides at No, that he is the ‘ of , the corporation described in and which executed the foregoing instrument; that he knows the seal of said corporation; that the seal affixed to said instrument is such corporate seal; that it was so affixed by order of the board of directors of said corpora- tion, and that he signed h_-— name thereto by like order. Mortgage Mate TITLE NO, : WITH = zlt (ROUSH-WALKER \COMPANY STAVSAES FORM OF NEW YERK BOARD OF THLE URDERWRITEXS Distributed by CHICAGO TRIE , . TNSWRANCKXY COMPANY - ¥ E UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 iceasiinsnates STATE OF NEW RX, COUNTY OF SS: oe On the day of 19 personally came » before me to me known to be the individual described in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged that _ executed the same. Beekground Use Oniy vB0WNot Reproduce STATE OF NEW YORK, COUNTY OF $$: On the personally came the subscribing witness to the foregoing instrument, with whom I am personally acquainted, who, being-by me duly sworn, did depose and say that he resides at No. , before me day of 19 that. he knows to be the individual described in and who. exccuted the foregoing instrument; that he, said subscribing witness, was present and saw execute the same; and that — he, said witness, at the same time subscribed h name as witness thercto. section; 5) BLOCK / 1406 f Lor | 26 -/Tax Nap COUNTY oxAMHKX NEW YORK Recorded at Request of - CHICAGO TITLE INSURANCE COMPANY Return by Mail to horas, prt, Ss, h 41 ep 1C0Cu Zip No,;14-00000 104-10106-10217| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 ecm ys i: Spandard vee T UL Fury TOM 7 Monga ete, bniterdual oF Coriays con, (Strarant ay ngtalzount 1 —— ote ot 1 CONSULT YOUR LAWYERS 928 SIGNING THIS INSTRUMENT — THIS INSTZUMED SULD BE useoay £23 OALY ast Set ———— ground Use Only - \ . - {NDo Not Reproduce - , | MORTGAGE NOTE $ 167,429.88 / New York, MARCH 2,1978 19 | Oe | FOR YALUE RECEIVED, We, 29 y husband and wife, residing in the City, County and State of New York, zy promise to pay to (Goust-warxer COMPANY, 48 Alabama Street, s.W.y ATLANTA, GEORGIA ( 30303) 24 or order, at the offices of{Roush-Walker Company, 48 Alabama Street, S.My) Atlanta, Georgia, or at such other place as may be designated in writing by the holder of this note, the principal sum of ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVEN THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED TWENTY NINE 88/100 ($167,429.88) on demand. a, Rollxomx ; os, a XSR TELUS EK ASE LO DECODES Tes AK Gat K Hea wod Kat AEA PE XK IKK KX PEE OAT PH bexaniditer acetic aneh et AX NKKKX MME MECK AXKKXKANKKKAKKKAKK KMAAKA WH AAPL KKK, IT IS HEREBY EXPRESSLY. AGREED, that the said principal sum secured by this note shall become due - at the option of the holder thereof on the happening of any default or event by which, under the terms of the mortgage securing this note, said principal surn may or shall become due and payable; also, that all of the covenants, conditions and agreements contained in said mortgage are hereby made part of this _ instrument. Presentment for payment, notice of dishonor, protest and notice of protest are hereby waived. This note is secured by a mortgage made by the maker to the payee of even date herewith, on property situate inthe Borough of Manhattan, City, County and State of New York, and commonly known ascand by Street Number (163 East 71st, Street,! New York, N.Y. { 10021) eal This note may not be changed or terminated orally. In the presence of: _ SS 14-0000 Vey 7 RETURNTO GIA sontas ar STATE OF NEW YORK, | , Backgrounc’ Use Only ; es Do Net Reproduce COUNTY OF NEW YORK J On this 2nd day of *hUARCH win the seventy-eight before me personally eame SaieE an: solid i do who executed the fore s that they excented the same. STATE OF NEW YORK, COUNTY OF On this day of . in the year nineteen hundred and vhefore me personally came to me knawn, who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say that be resides at that he is the . at the corporation described in, and which executed the above instrument: that he knows the scal of said corporation; that the seal-affixed to said instrument is such corporate seal; that it was se affixed by order of the Board of Directors of said corporation, and that he signed’ nanic thereto by like order. 1 hao of : Ho 1 5 : ae ff Gt qe wit hu! \ | = - to a. | : Z 2rKe Bog j ; eo & TAN . Sea | Oli |esae8 : go ORP j <c [RS Eg cf S € Q eno pA | GM be = RS f° pa lege ba TS o¥ae Jom PP 2e mt OM: H Nat ta Ge ‘ly 3 SS a-- s Pa 2 2a 8 EEO MSS | ELSES gu Bah) O |g] 2738 BS OQPA a“ P6a2% VS cn i ge2° -2B |: SO St. = | 28 x = Bin was oe | A |} £86 rs) STATE OF NEW YORK, COUNTY OF - On this day of » in the vear nineteen hundred. and » before me personally came to me known to be 7 the individual described in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same.;14-00000 104-10106- amt 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 \aiiceniannin _ PENS’ MORTC GE, made the 2nd Ww day of “MARCH i ninetcen hundred and Seventy-elgnt , between 3a geet ee husband and wife, both residents of the State of . New York E toe Bsc kgroun Tree. : : 20 Not Repiodsnn —, the mortgager, and \(ROUSH-NALKER COMPANY, 48 Alabama Street, S.W.)[Atlanta, Georgia . : , the mortgagec WITNESSETH, that to secure the payment of an indebtedness in the sum of t $16? 429,88) ONE HUNDRED SIXTYSEVEN THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED TWENTYNINE TE Dollars 7 lawful money of the United States, to be paid on demand, eo: i” P ycicbceonaoxat x orsgarte coc Joc Up aCOR ECU EHC RCC RECKON IKK AICHE [Dex DK HOLE HK POLK HOCK AK ANN ALAAN AK AKKXAKKIAK LAK AME BILAN i queen according to a certain bond or obligation bearing even date herewith, the mortgagor hereby | ; mortgages to the mortgagee ALL that certain plot, piece or parcel of land, with the buildings ‘and improvements thereon erected, situate lying and being in the Borough of Manhattan, , ‘City, County and State of New York, bounded and described as follows: Lo} BEGINNING at a point on the northerly side of 7ist Street, distant. \| 285 feet westerly from the corner formed by the intersection of the se northerly side of 7lst Street and the westerly side of Third Avenue; RUNNING THENCE northerly, parallel with Third Avenue and part of the w through a party wall, 102 feet 2 inches to the center line of the bloc THENCE westerly, along said center line of the block, 15 feet; :THENCE southerly, parallel with Third Avenue and part of the way through anot party wall, 102 feet 2 inches to the northerly side of 7ist Street; ar THENCE easterly, along the northerly side of 7lst Street, 15 feet to the point or place of beginning. . + Said premises now being known as and by Street Number 163 East | i 7st Street, New York, New York. . “ny;14-00000 104-10106-10300 { 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | a f. RETURN TO CIA . ORI LUA be LO, { [ Background Use Only . Cc . ‘ " Oo Not Reproduce ee. Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO IDENTIFICATION: NOSENKO, Yurily Ivanovich, a Soviet KGB officer who defected in 1964 and was subsequently involuntarily con- fined in the U.S. by the Agency for a period of approximately three years. BACKGROUND : NOSENKO first contacted Agency per- sonnel in Switzerland in June 1962 and subsequently defected. in. January 1964. NOSENKO was brought to the U.S. and after a period of relative freedom . he was involuntarily confined in .- April 1964. From April 1964 to : August 1965, -he was confined at an Agency controlled site in Clinton, ' Maryland. From August 1965 to October 1967,.NOSENKO was confined at |Camp Pear Virginia. In October 1967, he was returned to the Washington area, given increasing amounts of freedom until he was given total free- dom in April 1969. NOSENKO became a U.S. citizen in April 1974. NOSENKO ‘was employed by the Agency as a consultant in March 1969 and continues under contract to date. His present salary is $23,500 per year. APPROVAL : (1) The legal basis to confine NOSENKO against his will was discussed by Mr. Richard Helms, DD/P, and others with the Deputy Attorney General on 2 April 1964 (Tab 1). On 3 April 1964, the Agency General Counsel, Mr. Lawrence Houston, advised the Director of Security by memorandum that such confinement was proper (Tab 2). (2) There are a series of lettérs from the DDCI, DCI and others to various agencies, including the Department of _ Justice and the White House, covering the period 1964 to 1969, evidencing awareness of these agencies of the NOSENKO affair (Tab 3). (3) The conditions of NOSENKO's confine- . ment were established by the Office of ue ; Security (Tabs 4 § 5). up 14-00000 RESULTS TERMINATION COMMENTS iC By memorandum dated 2 October 1968, the Director of Security forwarded two reports to the DDCI summarizing. the results of the NOSENKO case to that date. The reports are voluminous. One was prepared by the Office of Security and the other by the FBI. Both reports conclude that NOSENKO was a bona fide defector. A draft memorandum attached to this file, dated 21 October 1968 and prepared by the CI Staff, raises question regarding NOSENKO's bona fides and challenges the above two reports. NOSENKO continues under contract to the Agency. He is brought to Washington r periodically to consult on matters germane to his background and experience. Various reports dre available in the files of the Office of Security which detail financial aspects of this case. No final accounting has been made since the project continues. (1) While the Office of Security files do document the rationale for the original confinement of NOSENKO, they do not document the rationale for his continued confinement over so long a period of time. A memorandum dated 5 August 1969 states that various congressional staff officers were briefed on NOSENKO and states that concern for his safety, as well as con- cern regarding his bona fides, prompted the prolonged confinement. (See Tab 6) (2) Office of Security files document a period in 1969 during which a mail cover was placed on NOSENKO. (3) During the above period, NOSENKO was allowed a pleasure trip to Florida. During this trip, Agency personnel, with apparent Headquarters approval, obtained the services of prostitutes. This apparently occurred on at least two occasions. 14-00000 FILES : Office of Security files on NOSENKO are maintained in the following locations: OS/SSD (Contact - Mr. Charles Phalen) OS/SAG (Contact - Mr. Bruce Solie) 14-00000 “<2. My. Helms explained ths No and indicated that shortly we would be faced with what. to another country might be a consideration. Mr. Halas explained we would probably face publicity problemas in. ° - a? MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD “= 3. SUBJECT: Discussion. with Deputy A thy _ General on Nosenko Cas bre eocHr Helus,'Mr. Houston and Mr, Murphy met with *: the Deputy Attorney General and henbers of his staff to discuss subject case. - Present from Hr. Katzenbach's-— staff wera Messrs. Foley, Yeagley and Reis. —. a we at least considered to be two problems on which we :.> would like the advice of the Department of Justice. Dos First, we would seeon feel compelled to begin hostile. ae interrogation of Nosenko in order to arrive at the truth with respect to his mission for the XGB and we wondered oe what the’ legal position would be in circumstances in. * ; which ve detained Nosenko against his will for this pur- | : ing. that we could obtain no additional information from -. -- Nosenko to deport him, We had thought of taking hin to. - Germany. and transferring hin to Soviat custody-in Borlin. _ where this has been done a number of tines in the past, "3, There was soae discussion of whether deportation. deporting to a third country of the kind We would en- — counter if ho were free in the U. S. Nr.’ Helms noted _ there were many itens of. information which we and the. - FBI realize are of no Significance beeause of the file) holdings»we have but which an unscrupulous newspaper nan . could use to create sischief, This aspect was then dropped and it was the consensus. that Berlin was probably the best place, . , : : : 4. The question of the basis for detention was again raised and related by Mr. Foloy to the conditions under which Nosenko is in this country. He is hore as an “ex- clusion and parole case" which means he has not been admitted and has been paroled to the Agency which is responsible for him while he is in this country. This 14-00000 sa acento in Berling | wee Co BBS ey parole can be interpreted. to mean’ parole to a specific locale which would provide sone justification for our. __ detaining hin for questioning. It was then pointed out, - however, that. if he said he wished to leave the country - to return to the Soviet Union, technically we would not. be able to detain. hin- further. _In this. event, we would be faced with the: need to deport his quickly and quietly and for this purpose the. immigration warrant of arrest. and deportation was probably the“best instrument, .Se: Mrs. Katzenbsch asked Mr. Foley to check into - this and Hr. Foley will in turn contact Mr, Houston, Mr. Houston will. in turn discuss the problem. with CIA. Office of Securit officials to get the background-of |. their liaison with the INS on these matters, ; coe A, , 6 Nr. Helas thanked. Mx. Katzenbach for his assistance and wa departed anid sone jovial banter with respect to - The Spy Who Came in Fros the Cold" about what we expected to happen to him when he started to climb ayer that Nwalye David E. Murphy” Chief, SR Division 14-0000 14-00000 pine LON N OGG 64-0903 MEMORANDUM FOR: : Director of Security. -- SUBJEGT: Parole Status of Defectors —_- .. 1,° On 2 April 1964 we had a discussion with the Department of Justice or the status of aliens whose inspection by I&NS is deferred upon arrival at our request and who are then paroled to this Agency. . It was the position of the Department of Justice that we were responsible 7“ for taking any action necessary to carry out the terms of the parole. . “" 2, As you know,. a basic parole agreement was executed by the : ‘Attorney General and the DCI on 10 February 1955. After setting up “. conditions for authorizing parole in any one case, the agreement states: ; “After parole of such aliens, the Central Intelligence Agency will assume -.": “+ Xesponsibility for care, supervision and control of a.kind and degree it ‘ believes consistent with the internal security needs of the United States” _. “during continuance of their parole status." This means that the : . responsible Agency officials must take the minimum action necessary: — . to protect the internal security needs of the United States. ‘The word “minimum" is not necessarily a limitation. It merely means that good judgment must be used as to what kind and degree of action is necessary.’ wee 3. The agreement further provides that upon-completion of the parolee's intelligence or operational purposes in the United States or if internal security reasons so require, the alien will be removed from this country through arrangements made by the Agency and, in such ve the A, Will inform vice in advance of each proposed’ LAWRENCE R, HOUSTON. General Counsel 14-0000 14-0000 (7 (C Tanuary 1975 SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO 1. Information that NOSENKO had defected and was in the United States in February 1964 was known to appropriate agencies and | articles had appeared in the public media. 2. NOSENKO was in the United States under an I&NS parole as the responsibility of CIA. _ The FBI was fully advised of the Presence of NOSENKO in the United States and interviewed 2 NOSENKO | on several occasions in March 1964, The United States Intelligence ‘Board was also formally advised on 12 February 1964 concerning the defection of NOSENKO, On 14 February 1964, NOSENKO was interviewed by Soviet in the presence of I&NS and State Department officials officials/and NOSENKO reaffirmed his previous request for asylum in ‘the United States. 14-00000 eanthority g granted under Section Toft : the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, as amended,’ I approve and xyecommend for your approval the entrance - of subject into the United States for permanent residence -is in the interest of the national security and-essentiel tothe farthessnce-of the national intelligence - mission. ‘In- accordance with previous correspondence in . Section 7 cases; itis understood that you. will present this. : matter to the ‘Attoriiay General for bis approval. - Since his- defection in: February 1964, th subject b bas provided valuable. information to this Agency and he wild contin ta be of value in the future a : Gubject has bee investigated abroad and here over 2 period of five.years and has submitted to a technical inter—" : , vogation. The question of bona fides is a continuing one and” eT should any information be developed definitely disproving his < - bona fides, it shall” he mads, available to your Service and the. Attorney General. . : G20e? 1 . > Sietaded fom auaaic dovnsradiag aad d2clazsiticatsa 14-00000 14-0000 30 October 1927 Nicolayev, Ukraine, USSR - Male - ‘Divorced -... _ Brown Blue/Gray 5ft. 12 inches - i 7 Sevier -, Caucasian -- - 14-00000 _) | 4987-1949 + Member Semenuniat Party, SSSQ - 14-0000 Selanenteatenanes vational inter e st: wae OF “to-this Ageacy-—Thereiore- WTS réquested ‘subject's ot ‘parole to this. Agency be extended for an additiqnal. | ‘- period of six. (6). months beyond th the expiration date of bis stay of 16 August. 1969... oa . “Deputy 3 Director of Security” - Lot - Pm, (lavestigations and Operational Support) . SO osraas/t ee. 16 July 1969 °C an CNOMT poectstet 9 14-00000 use Previous. ° ce . pv. THTERN AL” EDITICNS. c : | USE ONLY: 14-00000 ©, il February 1954, 3 7 MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr, McGeorge Buady oe - . tly ot : . . “Yuri Ivanovich HOSENZO SUBJELT =: ; ‘a. This monoraadim refers to tha State Dapartrent tao relaase of 16 February.on subject: case and provides addi- 7% - * tional background. as well as information en his. current: £ officer, NOSENZO is regularity ” Sa: HOSEMKO also attended various Sessions of the * Disarmanent Conference held in Genaya in 2982.. During. 7) | the. course. of these sessions NOSENKG Bough? contact with 2. ; officials of the UL Ss. Goverazent, informed those erficials =. iL, that: he was affiisated with the Sovist State Security ap— “paratus and voluntearad to aid the UL 3. Goveranant Ame. datecting Soviet subversive activity directed against the - ../. - US, Government, - During the courses of his eontact with . U.S, authorities HOSENKO stated that bis cooparation with. | _.the B.S. Govearnzant originated with his distaste and hatred a . for the Soviet vegime in general; with His desire to obtain. 2). “. + 'l yevange for the unjust death of his father, 's senior official = . gn the Sovist Shipbuilding industry, and vith the general... ' adaivatioa of the-Aaericans with whos he bad come in con-- tact within the Soviet Union, 0S .- - 4, in iato January 1964, NOSENKD arrived in Genava, | ' ggain Rasquerading as a member of the Soviet delegation —- to the Disarassent: Conference, Subject secretly avtified | his CIA contacts in the United States concerning -his pres-- . eaca ja Geneva and arranged to meet with these contacts,. Duriag a series of Seetings NOSENKO provided information including docunants concerning Sovier Stato Security acti-- vities within the USSR and abroad and a detsiled account of the XO3 operation against U. S. Professor Sarghoora which NOSENKC said ha had personally supervised at the direction of SEMICGASTRIY, thea Chairmen of the Cownictee for State Security (X53). ’ 14-00000 5. ° During these Most recent Restings NOSENKO announced Ais desirs -zo- jlaays the uSssR permaneatiy and seek his ‘future in the West. Hp Claised nis new work in the KG3 (First -. - . Baputy Chief af char Cepartaent Charged with the Survelllancs . . | and recruiteent of American visitors to the USSR) was ox-.. rn panding and that he would not bo able to visiz the West. Tn! with any iraquency,. Accordingly, he Prepayed “a -request ‘far * the Usited Statas..- He was tsker-to .:. oo ere he is currently undergoing interso- Cu being made to remove him te the Us. - Pa te aes extensive and that we will require’ additional _ thorough interrogation to establish Subjact's bona fides,. ed that CIA: contact with sub joc cerned with substantive aspects of the Disarmament Conference, aad he therefore is not expected to be able to Shad much, i any, Light. on that araa of our interest, Deo ot oo 7e- The possibility that SOSENXO*s defection was da oe : Signed. te wrack the conference was Bost carefully considered, . Tho-decision to accept hin was taken on thé conviction thar - 1° a oc the Soviets would ROT have chosea such a yolnerablo agent: - re *. Qstatl officer of the £53) for this kind of noys, . ; _ Thoaas fa. Raranessines: > #2 Atting eputy Director “ CSR/DEM/jif oO i ae Distribution: os “Orig — Adse- oe “2 cc-+ SR/CI/K-Dcwagy “Lec-efer koicc - CSR.. . sc - DB/os © Feb 64 | sur. AYIY : tyr 1 ae 14-0000 SUBIECT: . “ staaus, ‘0’ KSB. dn Moscow but-sus ineluded in the Soviet delegation: gent which peraittéd his to farry out intelligence - Security Zunctions. in Geneva on behalf of the KGB. : Sisarmazenz Confevence heid in Geneva in 1962, During the- - “. paratus. and goluatesred zo aid the B. 3, Goverment in - . OB, Se Governssnt, -Buriae the course of his cogtast with . taet withia the Sevie? Union, " C-NTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY - WASHINGTON 25, o.c, ._. OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELUGENCE Lot 12 February 1964.” ‘United States Intolligenca Boatd Menbers NEMORANDUM FOa:_ Yuri Tvanovich HOSENXO wo -) da “This memorandus refers to the State Departsent ; ‘Felaassa of 13 February on subject'coase aad provides addi- ‘Bieonal background as yell as information on his curtené--" 20 As a ESB staff offtcor, MOSERKO is regulsriy assigned te the. Counterintellisencs Birectorate of ths ‘to the Disarnanent: Conforenca as part of a cover ar 3,” NOSENKS also attended various sessions $f the 2.. course af thase Sessions, HOSENKO sought contace. Withee tle officials of the Be 8, GSoveranont, informed these ofiiciais . that. ha was affiliatod with the Sevist State Security’ ap- : detecting Soviet. subversive activity: directed against the Uu. S&S, anthorities, NOSEXES Stated that his cocperation with the U. S, Sevornaant originated with his distasrs and: hatred. for the Soviet regime in Seneral, with his desire te obtain - : revenge for the unjust death of bis father, 2 senior official ° in tha Seviet shipbuilding industry, and with the geterai- 7 2, acdsivation of the Anaricans with whea he had come in com < | 4. Tn late January 1964, Rosaxs arrived in Geneva, ayain sasquerading as a moaber of the Sovieg delagation fo ths Disarmament Conferences Subject secretly notizied his CIA contacts ia the United States Concerning his pras-—- | encs in Gansva and arranzed to meet with these coniezers, Suring a series af meetings NOSENXS provided inforpation including documents concoring Soviet State Security acti- vities within the USSR and shresd and 2 detsiled acecunt 14-0000 of the XSi operation against us S. ‘Professor ‘Sarghoorn . which NOSENXO said he had personally suparvised at-the direction of SEHNICHASTHIY, the Chairaan of the Comal oe tter - _ 4 Se. During these most recent sestings NOSENXO announced “his: desire te leave the USSR pernanesntly and seek his Zutuore +. dn the Yeat. > He claimed his new work-in the £68 (First: “roe ‘Deputy Chief of thar department charged with the surveillance and reernitnent. of: Ansrican visitors: to.the USSR) Was ax- - 1 panding and thatshe would not be able te visit the Best ..- ., with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared a regtest for “political asylum in. the United States. He was taken to aa . Fruakfart, Geraany wheres he is currentiy undergoing interre- ; gation. Plans are nov being made to Yenove him to the U. Sy fuse ot - -: S+ It should de geted that CIA contact with Subject has not been extensive and that wa will vequive additions] - . thorough interrogation to establish Subdject*s bona fidass -. - . LE shonld alse be noted that NOSENKO'’s duties ware. not con- “earned with substantive aspects. of the Disareament Conkereaca and he therefore is net expected to be gbin ta shed.a ch, if: - 2my; light om that.area of cur imterast. «+ Sy: : ec 7.. Tae possibility that NOSENXO*s defection vas da-" |--- : ' . Signed te wreck. the. conferonce was most carefully considered, : The. decision to accept hic. was- taken on the conviction thas. ‘the Soviets would ast. have chosen. such « yalnerable agent- wstaff officer ofthe £63} for this kind of move...” “Marshall 5. Carter -- a Lioutenant’ Ganaral, USA ten. . Deputy Direttor . 14-0000 ul Embassy nficial at. the-rvcan. frontation hare-last Friday-that;” he leit: Switertand. on the-way to. the. United” States 28 -hours} 2 before this<defection- was::re-|Swiss ‘ported by- tha *Russians i ‘Swiss authorit, = S! Ht; This statementby ‘Taformatior tats :oficerof-the Soviet Com-|today: shes. rt mittee of, Stzte'7Security? thalon the detec’ fon 3 : eared toamount|4.The-- Soi o 2 deniat-of the Soviet charge, Gereva:: it. -that the Swiss: authorities. bad tae’. Swiss: polic been negligect.in preventing his|5. that Ber: défection.. SS ee 2 Roe WN Axo, WHO qu: member of the Soviet delegation x id) piais to the Genev2. Csarmament con- Ve, 9 a tual ater. ference Feb: £ was allowed: to| defection: took “pl. ML meet with F wiet: diplomat|the preceding” here in‘ the-eresexce-of:-Uaited, F t#-Departrien: : nounced ‘atithe: time .that th: wrmecting- |Soniontation was -taking: plac ‘Nosenkoi-i in. Washingtor at the request.af} bassy_ofti | the: SovietscExnbassy, but: no/} other details-were made -pudlic. ftom: : I rhe. department.said that.:.almig w gl 14-00000 “These developments . came- 28 the Soviet Uniom kicked up ‘ta diplomatic fuss over the dis- “appearance of Ne Nosenko on Feb. 4, from Geneva, where ne nad been assigned as an exper vin the Soviet delega- ‘tion at the l7-nation disarma- eat conference. ” Phillaps ‘said. he was .“oo temporary ‘duty from KGB. (secret Do neadavarers in Mos- Up ta yesterday Moscow had been directing its public : plamatic wrath at the iSwiss, ¢aarging them with y. The provision inlomat to inter- xo was to assure the United part in no r soil. oo ted the Soviet _ See DEFECTOR, 43 Col. L already had | 14-0000 = SABE e ft tion aseeaecoatss aeons ors. that: vez ‘Stepped ‘rup.. its} protest: after-‘Tsarapkino,-had }publicly- downgraded-the’ : erecthat the|in. Geneva= At: any-‘rate U.S: S.a° gen-idisarmament + negotiator’ Wil- gn -the pos-|tiam ‘C. Foster: and ‘Tsarapxin|| it" been: overlook:|in Geneva yesterday at which is, fe! e . thati they said the case-was-not dis- ppected.> lintervie : nied. ‘in | meetiag=" i treatment} weet . 14-0000 14-0000 3: ‘the, ecord and will to be made for the installation of : ‘adequate’air-conditioning equipment to insure that a” comfortable temperature is maintained. (It is under- stood that there is quite a bit of equipment available through Logistic ‘channels. ) (3) Subject is to receive a bath; change of underwear; change. of uniform; and a change of linen for his bed. 14-00000 2s : ; erizined that we. will, have custody of the Subject until at least July; * ‘It was iggested that perhaps. we may wish to-explore. some modifications in the assignment of personnel . or schedule of ‘assignments. In. addition,: the Acting Chief, Support . Branch has suggested, that. immediate consideration be given to. devising” necessar pr rocedures. to-be ‘followed: ‘inthe. event of an ; emergency involving ] loss oft contre of ‘the Subject. This Should : and’ ‘specific procedures devised, and all guards roperly i informed as to-their responsib ities in. this ‘matter : - : ere Jack M. Bauman Bauman/ewd(5-12-64) 14-00000;14-00000 * 104-10106-10312) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | a Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO IDENTIFICATION: NOSENKO, Yurily Ivanovich, a Soviet : ; KGB officer who defected in 1964 and was subsequently involuntarily con- fined in the U.S. by the Agency for a period of approximately three years. BACKGROUND : NOSENKO first contacted Agency. per- : sonnel in Switzerland in June 1962 and subsequently defected in January 1964. NOSENKO was brought to the U.S. and after a period of relative freedom he was involuntarily confined in April 1964. . From April 1964 to August 1965, he was confined at an Agency controlled site in Clinton, Maryland. From,August, 1965 to October 1967, NOSENKO was confined : at Camp Peary, Virginia. In October Sos: 1967, he was returned to the Washington L area, given increasing amounts of freedom until he was given totai free- i dom in April 1969, NOSENKO became 2 : U.S. citizen in April 1974. NOSENKO was employed by the Agency as a consultant in March 1969 and continues under contract to date. His present salary is $23,500 per year. APPROVAL : (1) .The legal basis to confine NOSENKO . against his will was discussed by Mr. Richard Helms, DD/P, and others with the Deputy Attorney General on 2 April 1964 (Tab 1). On 3 April 1964, the Agency General Counsel, Mr. Lawrence Houston, advised the Director of Security by memorandum that such confinement was proper (Tab 2). (2) There are a series of letters from the DDCI, DCI and others to various agencies, including the Department of Justice and the White House, covering the period 1964 to 1969, evidencing awareness of these agencies of the NOSENKO affair (Tab 3). (3) The conditions of NOSENKO's confine- ment were established by the Office of Security (Tabs 4 § 5). 00'738 14-0000 TERMINATION COMMENTS By memorandum dated 2 October 1968, the Director of Security forwarded two reports to the DDCI summarizing the results of the NOSENKO case to that date. The reports are voluminous, One was prepared by the Office of Security and the other by the FBI. Both reports conclude that NOSENKO was a bona fide defector. A draft memorandum attached.to this file, dated 21 October 1968 and prepared by the CI Staff, raises question regarding NOSENKO's bona fides and challenges the above two reports. NOSENKO continues under contract to the Agency. He is brought to Washington periodically to consult on matters. germane to his background and experience. Various reports are available in the files of the Office of Security which detail financial aspects of this case. No final accounting has been made since the project continues. (1) While the Office of Security files do document the rationale for the original confinement of NOSENKO, they do not document the rationale for his continued confinement over so long a period of time. A memorandum dated 5S August 1969 states that various congressional staff officers were briefed on NOSENKO and states that concern for his safety, as well as con- cern regarding his bona fides, prompted the prolonged confinement. (See Tab 6) (2) Office of Security files document ‘a period in 1969 during which a mail cover was placed on NOSENKO. (3) During the above period, NOSENKO was allowed a pleasure trip to Florida. During this trip, Agency personnel, with apparent Headquarters approval, obtained the services of prostitutes. This apparently occurred on at least two occasions. 00'7239 14-00000 FILES Office of Security files on NOSENKO are maintained.in the following locations: OS/SSD (Contact - Mr. Charles Phalen) OS/SAG (Contact - Mr. Bruce Solie) SEGRE 3 00'740 Wee;“(o4-40406-10325| - [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 J- oe ea GRE LASSTFLED Ol Cty. CONFEPFMTIAL — OO secrer yl “ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET ne ee | SUBJECT: (Optional > 7 | bit Crim —- UWS V. Leow { fROM: EXTENSION | NO. William H,. season /REA/O 1592 | date TO: (Officer _Sesignation, room number, and DATE building) ORIGER'S COMMENTS {Number each comment to show from whom | receveo | rorwanoe ED INITIAL whom. Draw a line across column after ‘each comment.} - AC/CI/REA/O , 02 Nov 197 q 2. - AC/CI/REA C/CI Staft OGe - he | 13. pine SlO™easie” secret C) conFioenriat C] ESWAY Cy uncassinien Up 14-0000 elie DD 1 November 1977 _MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Counterintelligence Staff id) FROM : (William H. Godson) /R&A/O SUBJECT : Herbert Itkin File 1. f have reviewed the material in the Herbert Itkin file which is divided into two main divisions. The first concerns the details of Itkin's use as an unpaid witting informant on matters concerning an attempt by Haitian exiles in 1963 to unseat then President Duvalier. This involved a large number of contacts with Haitian exiles in New York, Washington, the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico. Itkin became a idegal advisor for a Haitian Government-In-Exile and put up $15,000 of his "own funds" for this Haitian enterprise. Bernard E. MONCURE (P) a CI Staff staff agent in New York, rode piggy-back on Itkin's contacts with the Haitians to make his own operational contacts within the group. He also provided a small amount of money to them ($4,300) from CIA funds. It would seem from information in the file that there was high-level governmental interest in removing Duvalier from office in 1963. This information is contained in hand- written notes which are paraphrased and indicate high-level interest in the activities of the Haitian exile group. (I suggest that this material be kept in case there are Freedom of Information Act requests on CIA activities involving Haiti in 1962-1963.) : 2. The second and bulkier section of material concerns Itkin's efforts to involve MONCURE and CIA in his attempts to secure custody of his wife's children from her second marriage. Itkin had been heavily involved as a lawyer and confidant with Mafia syndicates and labor unions, particularly the teamsters. While doing this he had gained a large amount of information on the Mafia. In March 1963, MONCURE had recruited Itkin for the FBI for domestic issues while maintaining for CIA the use of Itkin for foreign intelligence matters. The FBI and the federal prosecutors in New York starting in 1968 found Itkin to be a very important witness in a series of criminal indict- ments starting with New York City Water Commissioner Marcus. E2 IMPDET CL BY 019816 14-0000 CIP gq. SER Itkin and his wife had for a long time been :struggling to maintain custody over her children from her second marriage. Claiming that she had violated the custody stipulations of a New York court by moving them more than 50 miles from New York without his permission, Frederick Hersh, Mrs. Itkin's former husband, gained custody of the children by means of a ruling from the British court in 1966. Mrs. Itkin began legal procedures in New York to regain the children. As part of their effort they swore affadavits that Mrs. Itkin: had taken the children to England at the request of the CIA. itkin embellished on his CIA record by stating that he had worked for CIA for many years prior to 1963, and insisted that his original contact had been set up between Harold Stassen and Allen Dulles in Philadelphia in the summer of 1954. Most of these assertions were fabrications. MONCURE's CIA relationship was exposed in various legal circles in New York. The Agency wanted to avoid MONCURE's having to. contradict Mr. and Mrs. Itkins' affadavits in court. The FBI seemed to have been more interested in protecting Itkin's reputation as a witness than in protecting MONCURE's reputa- tion for honesty. ; 3. MONCURE did not appear in court. The Federal authorities eventually placed protection around Itkin and his wife, keeping them on a military reservation, while: he appeared as a star witness in numerous Mafia cases which led to covictions. : 3 2 4.,. One small side issuegis worth noting: (Chomas L. Roberts) who was a(law partner of Itkin)until mid-1961, became a(CIA staff agent under cover in Africa)?4The many fraudulent activities of Itkin spread a scintilla of suspicion around oberts The latter was given a polygraph examination in ‘rankfurt. He answered questions on his relationship with Itkin including financial and his few contacts with Marcus to the satisfaction of his interrogators. 5. Comments: The thrust of the file is mainly defensive. CIA was reacting to Itkin's tactics to help his wife gain cus- tody over her children. Itkin's numerous trips to England and Europe were made on behalf of the FBI, and they were part of an FBI attempt to-gain information on the Mafia. Before the recruitment of Itkin and his utilization by the FBI, CIA did pass to the Attorney General in 1963 information on a Department of Labor official's alleged criminal involvement with the Mafia, which MONCURE had elicited from Itkin. The file also refers to MONCURE's continued contact with one Mafia figure Lenzieri, who was a legal client, as a means of self- protection as Lenzieri represented a channel back to the Mafia — SECRET* 14-00000 & tae. SEURET a for MONCURE, who was apprehensive of Mafia retaliation because of his involvement with Itkin. . 6. I have talked to Will Kerbe who is presently the case officer in contact for MONCURE. He says that MONCURE is in limited law practice and is drawing a pension from the Agency as well as a contract for services connected with Golitsyn. There is probably nothing in the file which could damage MONCURE's security as much of the information regarding his association with Itkin has already been exposed. The most recent information in the file is a January 1975 memorandum for the record from Acting Chief, CI, which oo states that John K. Greaney, Assistant General Counsel had .. -. learned that Seymour Hersh had learned details of the Itkin-: - MONCURE relationship. It would appear that Mr. Greaney is - the most knowledgeable person in the agency on the legal aspects of the Itkin.case and probably maintains his own files. . 03 illiam H. Godson;Fa-ooobh Pat J+ | 104-t0706-10424 ‘ ‘(2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. er ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 7992 | . i. we SIGNAL CENTER USE ONLY . — & 4, « ty) ROE cor ace Tos rd MAO PAGE OF PAGES © | tel o «a o o 060 CLASSIFICATION SECRET | oe oge suBs: ITKIN, — 4 TELEPOUCH. : ARAM 4325 : eh : O wmoex . O nomex j 0 nerurn to: E 2 IMPDET i O wrnes Sa CL BY: 034405 | 3-4 oe | TO: Gel eaRay = RETURN To CIA SECRET TELEPOUCH Do Not Repraducs. i 1 t { wt ! . 2 DISP NO: (FANU}UL2S DATE: 3& NOVENSER 4574, 10: $ CHIEF OF STATION, culchee) FROM: CHIEF, EAST ASIA DIVISTON FYI ONLY: CMe : 03 | 2. ON & NOVENEER 1973 AR-C LESLIE v- JARVISs (4sto ecp/) IN BASHTHO- SUBJECT: AR. HERBERT ITKIN a AL te Se TON. HAGD CARRIED TO HOS A LETTER FROM AUSTRALIAN EJUSTICE A. R. MOFF- ITT REQUESTING INFORMATION ON THE RELIABILITY OF AR. HERBERT ITKIN WHOM HE DESCRIBED AS A FORMER CIA AND FEI EMPLOYEE. THE FOLLOWING PARAGRAPHS ARE THE GIST OF MR. MOFFITT'S LETTER». WHICH WAS ADDRESSED ; uTO "AR. WILLIAM CROSEY'. {SIC} DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE: = A. MGFFITT HOLDS A COMMISSION TO INQUIRE INTO THE INFIL- E TRATION OF ORGANIZED CRIME INTO NEW SOUTH WALES. IT IS OF SUBSTANTIAL LIMPORTANCE TO HIS INCUIRY THAT HE CONSIDER EVIDENCE GIVEN DURING A ' [ DATE : ‘COORDINATING OFFICERS z IP USE ONLY ] ORIG: UNIT: EXT: RELEASING OFFICER CLASSIFICATION SECRET CROSS REFERENCE FILE NUMBER gee 572 Spl 3 REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THF ISSHING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED & BAN NF * SUTEOINE 1G TELEPOUCH aly ——s— “rye 7 ‘oF ats Tea SIGNAL CENTER use ONLY es e|3 - _ [tthe Be co er rose no wae oF a 5 | | | ce | , ar - se | : cysamcefion | : o : . ers CRET a” _OGC SUBJ: ITKIN, HERBERT 54 4 4" ESSAGE HANDLING INDICATOR, DATE - TIME GRouP DISPATCH NUMBER . . y s . |". TELEPOUCH <3 Gani ow i O woex 0 ao'moex 2h ' OF return so: . if E 2 IMPDET D wens CL BY: 034405 COURT CASE IN ENGLAND If JULY 197% BY ITKIN. 8. IN HIS TESTIMONY IN ENGLAND MR. ITKIN CLAINED TO HAVE BEEN RECRUITED BY CIA IN AN “UN@DERCOVER CAPACITY" Ik ABOUT L954. HE | CLAINED HE WAS BITH THE C.I.A. UNTIL MARCH 2963 AT WHICH TINE BY SOME oy ARRANGEMENT HE WORKED FOS GOTH THE FBI AND CIA, Metin JA uany BIbG. Ce MOFFITT ASKS FOR INFORMATION ON THE STATUS OF MR. ITKIN DURING THE YEARS LILY TO 4959 AWD FOR COPIES OF “ANY RELEVANT. AFFI- DAVITS OF PERSONS IN AUTHORTTY\IN THE - Fer™ OR CIA USED IN PROCEEDINGS / “| - . nN as IN USA. x \ tee D- MOFFITT NOTED THAT IN THE INTERESTS OF PRIVACY HE ROUT- ay HIS LETTER VIA THE AUSTRALIAN-DIBLONATIC POUCH, AND ASKED THAT Trt REPLY BE RETURNED TO HIR BY THE AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON. 2. AR « MOFFITT'S REQUEST WAS HANDLESD BY THE OFFICE OF GENERAL | i i i $ 1 i H i { ! COUNCIL £06C} WHO MADE AVATLABLE FOR MR. MOFFITT COPIES OF THREE SAPFIDAVITS {ALL OF WHICH IN FUBLIC DOMAIN} beLevant TO HERBERT ITKIN i LAND HIS AFFILIATION WITH THE, CIA. OG6C CONCLUDED THEIR REPLY SY SAY- ZING THAT, HERGERT ITKIN FURNISHED INFORMATION TO THE CIA OVER A PERTOD i | 10F MANY YEARS, BUT THAT HE WAS NOT SENT TO ENGLAND TO COLLECT ANY DATE : COORDINATING OFFICERS: . IP USE ONLY ORIG: = ‘s. UNIT: . te C CRE A IFICATION ee ” “po teone (2LEPOUCH : r 6°00 8 ONC sftssirention \ TEPC R ET os (O66 Sur. 1Tidi, HERBERT é re : Ficcsscs HANDLING INDICATOR’ . DATE « TIME GROUP DISPATCH NUMBER i i at - TELEPOUCH) oe (ramuSanes D woe 0 neFnoes ee . | : D rerio: E 2. IMPDET , ; O wrues CL BY: 034405 . INFORMATION FOR CIA AND HE DID NOT FURNISH THE CIA WITH ANY INFORMA- TION WHILE HE WAS IN ENGLAND. . 3+ OG6C'S REPLY WAS SENT TO MR. MOFFITT IN THE SANE CHANNELS HIS REQUEST CANE IN. H@S POUCHING COPIES AFFADAVITS, BOTH LETTERS. U/S/C# VIA POUCH EZ IMPDET.d [ COORDINATING OFFICERS iP USE ONLY OGC MR. GREANY {IN DRAFT} DATE: °!. ORIGE ARLE UNIT? EA/ PHI / ANE EXT: SE°2/9033 CT MR. ROCCA {HN DRAFT} RELEASING OFFICER THCODORE G. SHACKLEY, C/EA | , Le CLASSIFICATION. SECRET Snose ReranENce menmeeR( AS SEPA 3d 2?;14,0000 104-10106-10547) vl 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE | PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | 10. sz;ve-gonoo — : n = 104-10106-107 16 : | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 o 12 Decender 1967 (see Houma Munitions Dunker - Lease? by Subject fire) — ALLEGATION: , CIA CONNECTION: SLRRISON has charged CIA bad no connection vith the - that the turglary of the allege’ burglery of the Houma Munitions Houra munitions bunker wes Bunker or any connection with the "CI A-{nspired.” He issued bunker itself. arrest warrants for Gorton However, Pierre SCHIUABERGER, prezizent NOVEL ani-Sergio ARCACKA of the SCHLUMBERGER CORPORATION, wes of SMITE charging therm with contact interest in 1950 for routine the Houma burglary. exploitation es a foreign intelligence souree. The FBI advicei they had no objection i ' SUBJECT: SCHLUMBERGER WELL SURVEY DG CORPORATION | | | | . to the. Agency's. interrogsting Pierre | SOURCE: > oe ' SCHLUMBERGER vho was en alien. In 1952 — DAYSTROM, INC. was acavired ty SCELINRERCER, Enclosure 24 of THC. The fgency had a contract. with DAY- CI/R2A reporantum ef STROM for an unclassified item| ($49,000 A y 7 sasust 1957. contract for the production of Mark IT limpet mines )i] Agency interest wes elessified SCHLUMBERGER, LTD. i¢ a Dutch firm controlled by Freneh nuctionais. After the merger, it was determine’ that future relstios- : . ship with DAYSTRON must be by — Agency policy not to place classifies contracts with « foreign firm. In 1963 the same __. @ecision wee reache eoncerning Agency con- tracts with Electro-Mechunieal Research, Inc., *a subsidiary of SCHLUMBERCER, ITD. ENR dexlt in 51} rhases of teleretry. Contact clesrances for other personnel of SCELUMBERGER are set out below. The SCHLDMRERSER COMPANY was the subject of <4 name: check in 1Sh7 bec. use of s conte ct reyvest, and it wis determine) that there are nunver ef 3 PER‘DIR corporations in Lstin ‘nerics which sre domi- rete! by Trench n-tion:ls. SCELUMBERCER has <« patented operation for cn ofl vell "shootins” service which 1s subscribei to by vorious of] companies. The SCELUNBERGER WELL SURVEYING CORPORATION in Bouston was controlled by Henri Georges DOLL, © Prench nations]. He was of coptsct interest in 1056 an¢ 19597. His wife is the doughter of Conrad SCHLUMBERGER. RETURN TO CIA 4 Background Use Only OE Do Not Reproduce (im August 1951 the Agency ves interested in contacting Professor Of , Eéouara POLDINI, ® geophysicist and professor st the University of . Geneva end formerly an employee of the SCHLUMBERGER CORPORATION in Paris, for operational use. He was to be used as = channel to a Janus - KARTAS who could give information ebout the fate of the previous employees of the Jersey Company in Hungary, the production figures end extent of exploitation of existing o11 fields and exploration of nev oil fields together with the names of the officials of the Russian Hungarian Company In March 1953 the SCHLUMBERGER file reflects that an FBI source furnished information that. one Maurice Henri MARTIN, employed as an - enginear by the SCHLUMBERGER Company, Paris, France, received a letter éated 27 July 1951 at Moscow from one SiegPied Gtefanovitch MOROSOFF, asking MARTIN for specialized information concerning geophysics. The ; letter requested that MARTIN's reply be forwarded to Moscow through an inter- mediary. From January 1932 until April 1937 MARTIN represented the SCHLUMBERGER Company in Russia as an engineer, and it was thought that the correspondence from MOROSOFF may represent a Soviet attempt to resume contact with MARTIN and Gevelop clandestine relations with him. The FBI conducted an investi« gation dated Jime 1953 and determined that Maurice Henri MARTIN resided at Nod Hill, Wilton, Connecticut end was employed by the SCHLUMBERGER Well Surveying Co., Ridgefield, Connecticut. Informants advised that eithough MARTIN was strongly nationalistic toward France, he pave every 4ndication of being anti-Russian and there was no evidenced? CP activities. When DAYSTROM, INC. merged with SCHLUMBERGER, LTD., research was done on the directors ani officers of SCHLUMBERGER, LID. The results ere as follows: OS indices reflect a record on Dillon ANDERSON, e trustee of Electro=Mechanical Research, Inc. (a subsidiary of SCHLUMBERGER, Lr.) who was elso & proposed trustee of “NEW DAYSTROM" when it merged with SCHLUMBERGER. ANDERSON is an attorney from Houstem, Texas who wes appointed by President EISENHOWER es an advisor to the QNetional Security Council from 1953 wmtil 1956. ° He wes considered for a special clearance in August 1955 but the briefing was not given. He was granted a covert Op clearance in December 1953 and April 1954(for use as a covert essociate on Project LPFUNNEL. Pierre SCHLUMBERGER, President and Chief Executive Officer, SCHLUMBERGER, LTD., Houston, Texas, French citizen, was of contact interest in 1950. Charles C. PARLIN, Director of SCHLUMBERGER, LTD., and @ member of the lew firm of SHEARMEN, STERLING and WRIGHT, Englewood, New Jersey, U. S. citizen, was of contact interest in 1962 but was security disapproved. PARLIN was allegedly the boy friend of Johanna BEKER who wes in contact with known Soviet Agents, ROBERT and JACK SOBLE. BEKER advised the FBI in 1957 that she received, peid for and tranemittea to Robert SOBLE, OSS information which wes given her by two former OSS employees. She also advised the FBI in 1957 that she SECRET eZ hf given ao very gener.) outline of her ectivities to PALIN sani fq ts reliubly reportes thet PARLIN ond BEER shire? = hotel roon in Follsnd in 1057. PARLIN recorrente: © Willice Woart LANCASTER for OSS employrent. LANCASTER was «4 perber of the Sure law firr cs PERLIB end bad « leng record of Coremnist, front <ffilietions. FARLIN - in 1654 travele? to Iwssie ss 2 serber of gelez:tion wunier the / gponsorshir ef the Uetional Council of Churches. Te wee also the . swyer for s Swiss 2 manent insustricligt who sold srms to the Tenis “en3 the Conmamist countries since thet time. Clerk Drowillerd GOODMAN, Vice-President of SCHLUMBERSER, ; “{[ta., Houston, Texss, U. &. citizen, was security cisapproved for : ure ty TED in 1052 smi for cont=ct use in 1955 beeed on his surport of Trofessor Dirk STRUIK, = collezrue ct MIT, who wes indicted on i mc Communist conspirstor ané ifentifie? es = 4 Forty member. In Farch 1059 the same terocctory information - Suynished the Comtuct Office to be eonsigereé in Ceternmining any Hiso, « took written by GX eiN's wife, Fay Ellen ny revievei by the "DAILY WORKER" in 1956. ee-Presicert of the SCHLUMBERGER WELL . : efiel?, Conmectient (U. S. citizen, niturctise? Foustor, Te: Ghi) wee sporoved for contact use in Mx 2657. Fis file is cleur. Thane ie 2 potction thet one Ers. 7. C. : TESESND, 5319 Fau’e]l Strect, Houston, Texas, fn Koverber 106) wes ‘ tresifent of the Rousten Chapter, Prunce forever, Toe Fichting French 4 Cormittee in Americ... _ , Jean C. LEG SURVEZTES CORPORATION, F MD, Vi Everett STRAITOE, ger, Rovston tres, SCHLUMBERGER “ELL SURVEYING Corroration, Houston, Texas, U. S. eftizen, wc security spproved (CAUTTO i) for contset use in Octoder 1950. His file is clezr. Dniel CCHAR Rennes. BERGER, French citizen, srcheolosist an? tescher i Frenee in 1095, wis : : * FRovever, in. Tile on Nicholas fb French Tinwncier, sat sucrestel Soviet rent, yhich conteine . det-ilet stedy of the inter- reltionshizs ent farily eonnections existins in French firms, er tion on D: = 1 therin. D:niel g Corpor:tion, ! nist-n (1943- Reout CURTEL of uw wealthy his brother, Heard B to Ceorcte 1 eae vert's brother, : worres for 33 1 Surveyin wir coumected vith the Yell Suerveyine Corperction in Tulsse SECRET, YD Mine, Mechine Bull (Competitor of IBK), are connected with Schneizer N ani Compeny, 42 rue d'‘njon, Paris. eancols SAAR-DEMICHEL, munzger of Compegnie Internctionnle de Cormerce, represents SCHNEIDER for the USSR end {s a Soviet agent. In Septerder 1961, an investigetion con*ucted in France disclose? thet “everything that takes piece in the Elysee is lnowm in Moscow within 48 hours onf the originstor of such intelligence is Francois SAAR-DEMICERL.” Machines Bull is controlled by General Electric Company of the U. S. ani SCHHEIDER emi Compeny is affilitete’d with U. S. Westinshouse Corporetion umier the none SCHHEIDER-VWestinghouse. : ed “ The Study in KAGAR's file contains the following sddittonal tnformztion goncerning SCHLUMBERGER and Companys _. Mewrice an@ Rend SCHLUMBERGER ere sffilicte’ with Lazeré Preres ené the Worms Bonk. Lagard Freres controls SCHNEIDER estinghouse an bas a Bew Orlesns Branch Office. Closely essocieted with the SCHLUMBERGER's is Charles DOH. DOH wie born et OJesse in 1921 end arrived in tle United States in 1937 to join the SCHLUKBERGER Yell Surveying Corporution at Houston, Texas. He tetome e U. 8. ‘citizen on 6 Septenber 1950. Charles has a brother, Jean, who was closely associated with Leonard BOUR‘D, 2 suspected Soviet ecent. _ERIN‘U was closely associated with Francois S/AR-DEMICEEL, previously restione? Soviet egent cannected with SCELUMBERGER and Company. Cusries DOE was approved for Agency contact use in Septerber 1955 es a verber of the SCHLUMBERGER Well Surveying Corrorstion. His file is clear. . : Rorer Rovert Henri EENQUET, Executive Vice-Fresident, - SCHIUMPERGER Well Surveying Corporation, Houston, Texas, was 4! fo contsct_use on a limited basis in October 1950. He had been an employee of OSS froxm 2943 to 1945; wos given American citizenship _ end the Congreseions1] Vedul of Ronor for ris deeds during World War IT. Arthur Henry FRENTROP, <n employee of the SCELUMBERTER WELL SURVEYING CORPORATION, Ridgefield, Connecticut, was of contact interest in June 1956. ‘Inform:tion concerning his epouse's critical attitute towede Averican eustoms ané institutions ené the dominant ,osition she exereise? over her busbani was furnished the contact office. | |;14-0000 “hee Ved | 104-10106-10753 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | oo 4 29 August 1968 — SUBJECT: GEITZ, Charles . , ae Charles SEITZ is identified as a pilot who was employed by the FLOURNOY Flying Service at the same time-es-Leslie Normen BRADLEY. It - 1s reported that SEITZ stated that when BRADLEY learned of the essassinstion (President KENNEDY), he decided he had to go to fiiemi immediately. A check of OS records revealed the following information on one Charles J. SEITZ who is currently being considered for a Proprietary Approval by DOD for Project WUBETON. He 16 to be used as @ flight instructor on an | zy unwitting basis for en Agency proprietary entity in Newton, Kansas. ‘The esults of investigation are not complete and clearance has not yet been granted. ‘ Charles J. SEITZ was born 31 January 1943 at Steele City, Nebraska and resides at 844 Gan Pablo, Wichita, Kansas. He is currently a test pilot with Cesena Aircraft Company, Wichita, Eenses. From 1963 to dime 1966 Subject was in the U. S. Army. He was a flight mechanic and had tours in Vietnam and Thailand. Charles's father, Charles Williem SEITZ, was born 21 December 1917 at Hollenberg, Kansas end currently resides at 2111 South Terrace, Wichita, Kenses 67218. Inquiry was mede of DOD if either Charles J. or his father Charles Wilitem SEFPZ, had ever deen employed by the Jack R. FLOURNOY Flying | Service and it was determined that both Charles J. SEITZ and his father were employed by FLOURNOY in 1962-1963. Tha Jack R. FLOURNOY Flying Service went out of business in 1964 end the ower, Jack R. FLOURNOY, ie currently employed as & salesman. . 5 pater aeeDULE —nIT from autem excuse aclng 30 Gaeiaesiteatie;14-00000 104-10107-10008) zp . [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | > 5 wn” RETURN TO CIA Ce 1 Cote Background Use Only yp LF Do Not Reproduce 11 January 1977 MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, SE Division ATTENTION : Division Security Officer - oe) FROM 3 (Thomas L. Briggs > . SE/X/LA SUBJECT _ : Appearance As Witness In Behalf of the United States Government REFERENCE : USA V. Gerald P. Hemming, Et Al. (76-371-CR-CA) _ 1. . During the period of my employment as a-Special Agent. at the Drug Enforconscnt sdaluiotiacion Qiy 107t + don 1977. T conducted an ‘interview of Gerald Patrick Hemming (DPOB-1 March 1937, at Los Angeles, California) on 23 May 1975 at DEA Headquarters. in Washington, D.C. My report concerning that interview has become part of the case file “in -USA v. Gerald P. Hemming, Et Al., Case Number 76-371-CR-CA, Southern District of Florida, Miami, Florida. 2. Upon my entrance on duty in SE Division on 5 January 1977, I orally informed the Division Security Officer, Billy Hix, about - the information in paragraph 1 above. Mr. Hix asked me to submit the information in writing as soon as I was settled in the Division. On 7 January 1977, howevey,,,Special Agent Robert Fredericks telephonically contacted Gage Masa) DC/SE/X/LA, and told her that the United States Attornery, Southern District of Florida, had requested that I appear. at the U.S. Courthouse, Miami, Florida on 10 January 1977 to confer with the Assistant United States Attorney, Karen L. Atkinson, regarding my appearance as a witness in behalf of the U.S. Government in the trial of Gerald P. Hemming. 3. During the afternoon of 7 January 1977 I conferred with Mr. Hix who advised me to contact the Office of the General Counsel. I talked to Mr. Edmund Cohen who advised me to get in touch with the Office of Security, External Activities Branch (OS/EAB). I completed an Outside Activity Approval Request (Form 879), obtained the concurrence of DC/SE, Mr. John Stein, and submitted the Form 879 to OS/EAB. OS/EAB sent me to Central Cover Staff (Mr. Blandford) and then to the Office of the General Counsel. After discussions with Mr. Cohen, I called Petes 14-0000 S/A Fredericks in Miami at Mr. Cohen's Suggestion. S/A Fredericks was not available. Mr. Cohen then advised me to return to my office and he would contact. me with further instructions. Mr. Cohen retained the Form 879. Subsequently, Mr. Cohen advised me that I-should travel - to Miami as requested and that CIA would reimburse me for expenses connected with my activities in behalf of the U.S. Government. He further advised me that being in an overt cover status I should state, © if asked under oath, that I am currently a CIA employee. 4. On 10 January 1977 I traveled to Miami where I met and conferred with AUSA Karen Atkinson and DRA S/A Robert Fredericks. They informed me that Gerald P. Henming's case had been severed and his trial would not begin on 11 January. AUSA Atkinson told me she wanted me as a rebuttal witness if Gerald P. Hemming presented the defense that he had been working at the direction of DEA. She said they would not call me until and unless that defense was presented. She also said that she felt that any attempt to question me concerning my current place of employment was irrelevent and she would object to any such line of questioning. She said she would only ask me where I was employed at the time I interviewed Hemming. I returned to aShangien LC. he cutie day. . 23 (Thomas L. Briggs) Distribution: 1 -ccs” 1-0S i - o6c 14-0000 Girl 16 January 1978 MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD FROM: Edmund Cohen Assistant General Counsel SUBJECT: U.S. v. Hemming : o} - On 22 November 1977 the undersigned accompanied by Messrs (Thomas Briggs) Gary Mattocks and Robert Barteaux, travelled to Miami to confer with Judge Hoeveler, and Assistant U.S. Attorney Thomas M. Sherouse, U.S. District Court, Southern District of Florida, about subject case. Messrs.(Brig S)and Mattocks had dealt with Mr. Hemming while they were employed by the Drug Enforcement Administration and Mr. Sherouse wanted them available as rebuttal witnesses. Mr. Barteaux also was sought as a possible rebuttal witness to describe the Agency's relationship with Mr. Hemming in the event that Hemming raised a CIA defense. QO 2. On 23 November Mr. Grigg). Mr.. Barteaux and the undersigned met in chambers with Judge Hoeveler, Mr. Sherouse, Mr. Roger Howard, law clerk to Judge Hoeveler, and Mr. Ted Sakowitz, Public Defender for the Southern District of Florida. Mr. Sherouse decided that Mr. Mattocks would not be required to, testify and he did not attend the meeting. The Judge initially expressed some reluc- tance to have an ex parte conference because Mr. Hemming had assumed primary responsibility for his own defense with only limited assistance from the Public Defender. The Judge insisted that a transcript of the meeting be made but he promised that the transcript would be sealed and, in fact, would not be transcribed. 3. The undersigned indicated that the Agency had no interest in the outcome of the case and interposed no ore Breede introduction of any relevant information. Our sole concern was to protect Mr .{Briggs)and his relationship _with’CIA both before and after his DEA employment. The Judge was informed that Mr? Griggs) sole con- nection with Hemming was on 23 May 1975 and that he had no contact with Hemming during any period of Agency employment. The national security consequences of exposure of Mg? riggs as well as the career consequences were outlined. In addition, the Judge was informed that Mr. Barteaux was prepared to testify as an overt Agency employee about any relationship between Hemming and CIA. SECRET eueQ IMPDET ch syvb 3ST . 14-0000 ° 4. Judge Hoeveler asked Mr. Sakowitz to cross-examine Mr G@rida to determine whether he had any information which might be relevant to Hemming's defense. Mr. Sakowitz stated that although he was aware that Mr. Hemming wished to call Mr .(Briggs)aS a witness, he was not fully informed of all aspects of the case and, therefc re, reluctant to question Mr .Briggs 2}Thereupon, Judge Hoeveler, swore in Mr? riggs)and proceeded to ask him a series of questions to determine whether Mr. Grigg9) interaction with Mr. ‘Hemming had been in any way connected with his CIA employment. At the conclusion of this examination the Judge gave Mr. Sakowitz a second opportunity to question Mr? Griggdand when Mr. Sakowitz again declined, he stated that in light of the national security consequences which had been brought to his attention he was not inclined to permit questions relating to Mr. Grigg CIA employment. ° 5, At the conclusion of the conference in chambers, but before the jury was admitted into the courtroom, Mr. Sherouse informed Mr. Hemming that Mr. rigg)°3 was available as a witness. When the trial proceeded Mr. Hemming concluded his defense without calling Mr? Griggs. Mr. Sherouse, however, did call Mr. 03 03 Griggs)as a rebuttal witness, On cross-examination Mr. Hemming asked Mr riggs) whether he was with CIA. Mr. Sherouse promptly objected to the question, the Judge sustained the objection and Mr. Hemming went on to the next question. The trial concluded soon afterwards without Mr. Barteaux being called as a witness. It was subsequently learned that Mr. Hemming was found guilty as charged. i a Edmund Cohen EC: jz Distribution: Origing] / LITIGATION-CRIMINAL, Hemming Gerald P. - EC Signer 1 - Chrono 14-0000 ROOM NO. AND BLDG. ADE OF EMPLOYEE (Print or COMPONENT 03 VAL 1S REQUESTED INCLUDING NAMES OF ORGANIZATIONS OR INDIVIDUALS J. FULL DESCRIPTION OF OUTSIDE ACTIVITY FOR WHICH APPRO CONCERNED, DATES, LOCALE, ETC. (Refer to HR 10-7 before completing) NAME AND 6R type) Joe te tt L erdar to te Fotrack 2h 2. REMARKS BY REQUESTOR IN ENGAGING IN THE REQUESTED ACTIVITY, I WILL MAKE NO REFERENCE TO OR DISCUSS MY CIA ASSIGNMENTS OR DUTIES. I (WILL, WILL NOT) BE IDENTIFIED AS EMPLOYED BY CIA FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS: SIGNATURE OF REQUESTING EMPLOYEE 3. COMMENTS AND CONCURRENCE OF STAFF. DIVISION OR OFFICE HEAD SIGNATURE OF OPERATING OFFICIAL FOR COMPLETION BY EXTERNAL ACTIVITIES BRANCH AND RETURN OF ORIGINAL TO EMPLOYEE DATE: SECURITY. APPROVAL HAS BEEN (GRANTED, DENIED) FOR THE ACTIVITY CONTEMPLATED BY THIS REQUEST. AID) (eoR) CHIEF, SECURITY SUPPORT DIVISION CLASSIFY AS APPROPRIATE FORM OFN USE FREVIONS all tar nee ON FR an SY — qlb Sqde uP Tarr Stevo, 30S 350 sy49 Tk 7S Oef. | soup oh el Ws a Sorgen ae ene UF lis “ody A Sheree sek [giv 2 veeds u, Ricaaire Mable 3 tral wae Hola Fa ksh Ve _Onlegt of Mo © 6. Bpyfelea itn, ate Mo Ao ob ne. ioe A Sryrdine ne Prager ku. x briefer | f Bate LW Oe a , S/p/ Aare b= Hay he “oA = hy tle = ; ceorer Alsace Sede now = ens a. = 2h ioe ask a SEE Coevala ?. ewsing) - we S. Us. vs owning Gene Ne 6*71-Cy=cA a P.O. Bly. 2 Ct Unme 3.00 NEE. arene Plea 250 4136 en — - 52 1 Flor be A. of (0 * Neve \ 4) Ey arn pata eT et Cr a a oe 14-0000 Nesey aren ‘il an > publi ee ann _Altnn | Veg rod bo 3 ey Hoe | tay Wb TD, 3 on 187s aly nee 2 ah ate oe Fla hh Hh awe hou $" aes. ea i oe \\ec. oe le Abe lp ar 1p Aalfy ody Sa prt 14-0000;"|t04-10107-10068 [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 Hae: RETURN TO CIA ane Background Use Only Do Not Reproduce ; 7 October 1976 MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Contract Personnel Diviston ATTENTION . “ae _ Mr. Rod Brooks Joal E. Keys, Chief Corporate Cover Branch Central Cover Staff FROM SUBJECT : Request for Letter of Agreement 0? 4. Please prepare a Letter of Agreement between the Agency and & GADLUE, which..through the President of the firm, ir Gmmett 4. Steele) has aureed to place on retainer a Contract Agent of Europe Division, ov COPHONE/1. dohn J. Murray, Jr. represented the Agancy fn these negotiations. Identities will be forwarded under separate cover. ; . reo om 2. Effective 1 October 1976, VBPLUE WITT place on retainer (TOPHONE/1 at an annual retainer of2$9,000, which will be paid to him in monthly increments of $750 b LUE. The Company will overtly negotiate a retainer contract with, QOPHONE, which will make eminently clear that both are negotiating and. con juding the contract as independent parties; that the Company, LUE, will have no obligation to withhold Federal, or state income taxes, or Social Security taxes. % 3. In consideration of the support rendered, the Agency wilt pay(L. LUE $10,000 annwally.. Prevision. is made in “his amount to offset any noni T expenses the firm incurs in its overt associations or support of OPHONE/T. It also serves, in part, to minimize the chances that auditing personnel wi Taidentify a wash transfer between .the notional facility and payments to CFOYHONE/1. . z oO - 4. The Agency will reimburse(L BLUE ‘in gu rterly increments via a contrived contractual arrangement betwe nL LUE and a notional facility of the Agency. Cancelled checks will serve as adequate accountings for monies paid(LABLUE, : -0& 5. Please include the usual paragraphs of appreciation, secrecy, and prohibition of bona fide employment. : 6. All information relating to this agreement is classified secret. Both the Agency and the Company agree that the most stringent ‘Safeguards will be taken to protect this information, including the E-2 INPDET CL BY 055087 WARNING NOTICE SENSITIVE INTELUIGENSE SOURCES oy mr T Yl | cen 1400000 oe aot . . . _ . : existence of the agreement. Any information in any fora that must be given to a third party by either the Agency or the Company wil} > be done in strict conformance to the laws ‘safeguarding national . .. security information, and only with full consultation ketween the “3 Ageney and the Company, * --" - an ee - JOEL EL KEYS) -2- -. SEBRET;ATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992) “toa | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSIN 104-10107-10085) = : (90 46437 . : - RETURNTO CIA . Background Use Only Do Not Reproduce y? Y > February 1969 MEMORANDUM FOR: Office of the General Counsel VIA + Chief, Central Cover Staff INFO : Mr. Rocca, CI Starr . 93 SUBJECT : (Thomas Lee Roberts) The Itkin Case 1. At our meeting on 30 January 1969, certain additional questions were raised relative to the relationship between Goverts)ana Itkin. om 2 21g First, when did G.BELOBE Become aware that Itkin and the Conestoga Group Yhad approache Qoberts with a proposal to represent them in(@frica$toWe were advised in 1966 through case officer yee cover company busirféss with interests from the United States and England. We were given the name of the Conestoga Group)no later than 27 October 1966. We cannot say that we then knew t individual names of those involved. It was not uncommon for oO Goverts to have discussions with a number of potential clients 3 At the 30 January meeting, we were also asked certain 08 questions about Qobe tS) financial involvement with the (law ‘tirm) he and Itkin has be@A with prior to (Rdbert's yssociatic with the Agency. 93 o3 2. We can add nothing to(Roberts account of January 1968 reflecting that he entered into an agreement with the firm on 31 May 1961 wherein he was — authorized leave of absence from 1 June 1961 to 31 May 1963 drawing $100.00 per week for that period. . OF c che MILLIGAN ) ) Chief, CCS(LBGLOBE ge;14,00 10. 7 | 0D }4-10107 -1008 [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | ¢ € OGC 69-0402 4 March 1969 RETURN TO CIA Background Use Only Do Not Reproduce MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 1. I showed Mr. George Carey his memorandum of 1955 to the Director referring to T. and H., and said we thought that H. referred to a General Hardin. After considerable speculation Mr. Carey finally placed T. as being Juan Trippe and Hardin as an Air Force General who was being placed with 24 @an Anm)for operational reasons, primarily technical information collection. Independently Mrs. Lovejoy had checked with Mr. Larocque, and he also recalled General Hardin was a man Mr. Carey was interested in placing with (Pan Am for operational reasons. zy 2. The Air Force Register lists a General Thomas O, Hardin, Air Force Major General, who retired in 1955, which would seem to fit in as he is listed as an airline executive. Mr. Carey had no knowledge whatsoever of the Itkin case, and we felt it was out of the question that General Hardin is synonymous with Philip Harbin. J hit - LAWRENCE R. HOUSTON General Counsel OGC:LRH:bt 1-C/CI/R&A 1-DCS 2-General Counsel prone Wubject HERBERT ITKIN;+-o0000 104-10107-10089) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY. ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 Vile: by: "OG SUT: EEGN, -HERBERT_/ ( = SECRET 1 i : : i ae aspnat O mo O. no moex : : | | O nervm to: : ‘, E 2 IMPDET, i ' i Q rues * zo CL BY: t fro "a oa enieceaey— 4 ‘ | Ise = CRET TELEPOUCH H od 22 i i DISP NO: (Fand-a328 an . RETURN TO CIA : i] IDATE!- Lb NOVENBER 1473 3-10 Background Use Only d vl es Do Not Reproduce : {| i7o: CHIEF OF BASE. GELBouRRE aa CHIEF OF STATION, (CANBERRA)! 3-4 ij FROM: CHIEF. EAST ASIA DIVISION Poot Aye +c; SUBJECT: HR. HERBERT ITKIN ‘ auea FYI ONLY? i: 3 Py a PARAGRAPHS ARE THE GIST OF MR. MOFFITT'S LETTER, Z TRATION OF ORGANIZED CRIME IKTO NEW SOUTH WALES- XA zy iE aia eee hs 32-ON.. > NOVENBER:-2923 WR. (LESLIE Ve: JARVIS A Aszo -REP IN BASHING - TON. HAND CARRIED TO H@S A LETTER FROM AUSTRALIAN EJUSTICE A. R. MOFF-. ITT REQUESTING INFORMATION Of THE RELIASILITY OF NR. WHOM HE DESCRIBED AS A FORMER CIA AND FSI EMPLOYEE. THe FOLLOWIKG WHICH WAN ADRRESSED {TO “MR. WILLIAM CROSBY". {SIC} DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGCUCE: A. NMGFFITT HOLDS A COMMISSION TO INQUIRE INTS TRE INFIL- IT IS OF SUSSTANTI SL IMPORTANCE TO HIS INCUIRY THAT KE CCNSIDER EVIDENCE GIVEN SURING A IP USE ONLY CROSS REFERENCE 14-0000 1 = Dh wereme ror : a * E 2 IMPDET Orne ; — cL BY: 0344805 ° SouRT CASE IN Enc AnD TN WL TAAL ey rr . B. IN HIS TESTIMONY IN ENGLAND MIR. TTKIN CLAINED TO HAVE. |. BEEN RECRUITED BY CIA IN AN TUNEDERCOVER CAPACITY" IN ABOUT 395%. HE | CLAINED HE WAS WITH THE C.I-A. UNTIL MARCH 1963 AT WHICH TINE BY SOME ARRANGEMENT HE WORKED FOR GOTH THE FBI AND CIA. UNTIL JANUARY 1968. C. MOFFITT ASKS FOR INFORMATION ON THE STATUS OF MR. ITKIN | + DURING THE YEARS 2964 TO L4b9 AND FOR COPIES OF “ANY RELEVANT AFFI- DAVITS OF PERSONS IN AUTHORTTYAIN THE. FBI OR CIA USED IN PROCEEDINGS IN USA." BN oR - id <|| king. ¢ Dee NOFFITT NOTED THAT IN THE INTERESTS, OF PRIVACY-HE ROUT- | ED WIS LETTER VIA THE AUSTRALIAK-DEPLONATIC POUCH. AND ASKED THAT THE | REPLY GE RETURNED TO HIN BY THE AUSTRALIAN ENBASSY IN KASHIGTON. 2. NR. MOFFITT’S REQUEST UAS HANELESD BY THE OFFICE OF GENERAL wees : ; COUNCIL {£66C} YHO NADE AVAILABLE FOR MR. MOFFITT COPIES OF THREE S AFFIDAVITS {ALL OF &GEICH IN PUBLIC DOMAIN RELEVANT TO HERBERT ITKIN AMD HIS AFFILIATION WITH THE CIA. 0G6C CONCLUDED THEIR REPLY BY SAY- FING THAT HERSERT ITKIN FURNISHED INFORMATION TO THE CIA CVER A PERTOD p 2GF MANY YEARS. BUT THAT HE WAS NOT SERT TO ENGLAND TO COLLECT AY 14-00000 , : E 2. IMPDET O wones : CL BY: O34405 INFORMATION FOR CIA “ann” "HE DID NOT FURNISH THE ‘CIA WITH ‘ANY INFIORMA- ‘TION WHILE HE WAS IN ENGLAND. 3+ OGC"S REPLY WAS SENT TO MR. MOFFITT IN THE SAME CHANNELS HIS | REQUEST CANE IN. Hes POUCHING COPIES AFFADAVITS, BOTH LETTERS.. ‘U/S/CB VIA POUCH ‘ E2 IMPDET.d . COORDINATING OFFICERS GREARY ZIK DRAFT} CI NR. ROCCA {EN DRAFT} Qee DATE:LE KOVEMEER LV oncLARESHER) BAK unit: EA /; ext: SLAL/9G23 IP USE ONLY THEODORE 6. SHACKLEY, C/EA RELEASING OrmiceR REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED;14-00000 1104-10107 -10135) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | . woe . 7? - OGC 69-0181 31 January 1969 MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD RETURN To CIA . ‘ ckground Use SUBJECT: Herbert Itkin Do Not Reproduce! 1. A meeting was held on 27 January 1969 with Messrs. Rocca, Houston, Warner and myself to discuss the ramifications of the confrontation with the New York FBI office on 17 January. It was concluded that additional information was required on 03(Thomas Le Roberts) and (Robert Delsog.°> 1 contacted the Director of Security and requested the security files on these two individuals and was advised that we could not have the security files but that Mr. Ward Greene would bring the files to the office and discuss their contents openly, 03 2, On 29 Fanuary, Mr. Greene brought the security files on (Roberts) and elson) and was most cooperative in explaining their contents, “Attached is a chronological rundown on the pertinent information on (homas L. Roberts} affiliation with the FBI, CIA and Itkin. 03 3. On 30 January a *reeting was held°with Messrs. Houston, Warner, Rocca, and fugene Milligan), ccs /LPGLOBE, to discuss the operational use of Mr. Roberts, Mr obert9) has been a Staff Agent of CIA since 3B August 1961, From March 1964 to alpyember 1964 he spent time in (West Afric writing a monograph on (West African legal)problems. /° It should “be noted that this task was performed under a grant from a foundation which was blown in the MHDOWEL exposures. In November 1964 Roberts) oF was assigned for Cover to the(Radio Corporation of America zy legal) staff where he remained until March 1965 and then went to (@aka?, {2-10 yp 14-0000 o 4, The facts in the attached chronology are subject to question since they are the result of (Roberts} own explanation of his affiliation with Itkin rather than having been determined from independent sources, The most critical aspect would appear to be the owledge or suspicion that Itkin may have known of O Roberts affiliation with CIA. This knowledge is borne out by 03 ( 2pf the strange way in which Itkin repeatedly bring? oberts¥ name into the story which Itkin develops about his CIA affiliations. One of the questions to be. answered by @PGLOBE personnel is whether or not (Robe2ts) reported his activities with Itkin in Geneva, Switzerland, in March 1966. There appears to be no record of (Roberts having explained why he never pursued the Itkin debt or what his financial contribution was to the (law firm of Itkin, Robertso& and Greenbaum.) 5. Mr. Rocca was advised by Mr. Sam Papich of the FBI that the New, York District Attorney may be considering prosecution against Rovéeey for having absconded with funds received from negligence cases. We do not have sufficient information to evaluate the likelihood of criminal prosecution. It may be necessary to discuss this problem with representatives of Mr. Hogan's office, Pe) 6. With regard to Robert Debsos) there appear to have been two operational considerations, one having been a request to use him with Project DTPILLAR from November 1953 to February 1955, and then a request in 1963 by the Domestic Operations Division for his use on Project WUBRINY. In March 1964 DO Division advised Security that (Delson was not going to be used on WUBRINY. Mr. Rocca comniénted that there are some rather ominous allegations against members of the firm of (Delson, Levinu&S and Gordon)) indicating that one member of the firm was a card- carrying member of the Communist Party. At the present time Mr. Rocca is investigating the DITPILLAR use of Mr. (Belson) 03 JOHN K. GREAN ‘Agsistant General Counsel Attachment .... ce: C/CI/R&A 14-0000 » ° ; 7 March 1966 (Robert) received letter from [tkin but his secretary advised that(Robérts was on vacation in Austria. Itkin contacted(R obeztd in Q@ustria) i¢ and set up meeting in (Geneva, Switzerland.) - t t 0 15 March 1966 Meeting at (Hotel Beau Rivage) in Geneve Present were Itkin and wife) (Jim Marcus), o6 (Littman) and (wife) Meetihty lasted three days. No projects get’ off the ground. . ° : og | Nov 1966 Robebts)in New York City, mgt at (Marcus's: apartment with Itkin and (Marcus's) father. Then met Itkin again at a dinner given by (Mario Brod.) ob 4% Nov 1967 Q@cbertd again in New York and contacted Itkin. Had lunch with Itkin and (Brea) Last time (Robe ts/saw or heard of Itkin until he read in the press about the Marcus scandal, oO 14-0000 Nov 1949 Jan 1950 Nov 1950 Aug 1955 Nov 1955 June 1956 Fall 1956 Apr 1957 6 Apr 1961 1 June 1961 TH lpy © (Roberts )was sent to overt CIA personne o3 (zHOMas L, ROBERTS 23 ob (Roberts) volunteered his services to Boston FBI; not accepted. 03> 10 @oberts left United States to study in(Paris) From Nov. 1950 until Nov. 1955 reported on security matters to the Boston FBI) Office, Labor Youth League. zy 06.03 Itkin (hired Roberts) to work for @elson, Levin & Gordon) (Robeftd says he was Gired to handle G maritime matters | in litigation.) tor Rovert9 moved to New York City. / 24 Resumed services of reporting to (BD Was a paid informant of (New York FBD office reporting on the National Lawyers Guild, 24 oO overtd and others submitted profit-sharing plan to @elson, Levin & Gordon} not accepted, E 9 0 Roberts) resigned from(Delson, Levin & Gordon ) to form a new(firm, Roberts, Greenbaum & Itkin, ) 08 (No mention of financial arrangement of setting up new firm.) Coveted came to Washington and talked with Robert Amory about employment with CIA since Amory had been a former profe$sor of (Roberts. | . recruiter and filled out an application for employment with CIA, ° ° - Rover took a leave of absence from the Girm of oo Roberts, Greenbaum & Itkin) which was.to last . from 1 June 1961 through 31 May (1963) Roberts)ox oF ova 14-00000 06 was to receive 6100 per week from the_firm while on the leave of absence. (Robert 4 did receive the following, payments: 93 0% Sept) 1961 62003) & Dec) 1961 - G100) ra) Go Jan) 1962 %G10g, A Iufla 1962 - G100)% ef (8 June) 1962 #G500Q NOTE: Roberts 3 received only $1,000) when he should have . received ($10, 400.) 24 Oo . 03 12 July 1961 (FBl)advised that Roberta) was still reporting to them in New York. 25 July 1961 (Robetts) was given CIA polygraph interview. 3 Aug 1961 Robert3 approved by Office of Security for CIA employment as a Staff Agent. 74 Sept 1961 , @pp advised they had broken off all contact with @oberts.) a3 03 ob 24 May 1963 (Roberts) wrote letter to (firm) withdrawing his membership effective 61 May) 1963. Q . oO : May 1965 Ag overs) received a check from, tkin for $2,500 but with the stipulation that Ro ert)! send $1,250 to England in order to get the money out of reach of Itkin's first wife. 23 i2-f0 26 May 1965 (Robert) arrived in(Dakar,} 16 June 1965 CRobértd. sent $500 to Itkin,in England after . asking — about a desk and chair to be sent to Robert, in (Dakar 3 Para) 10 Nov 1965 03(Robert3 forwarded money to Aida Itkin in England, i) Jan 1966 Itkin advised Gobext) about the formation of (Conestoga, Ltd.) - ar.) . , 33 Feb 1966 Itkin wrote to Robert) about Senator Lodge.