DS ACT OF 1992 | - “(o4-10722-10741 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECOR a ; : . ; .. : a. ies SUBJECT: Robert A. Maheu Mr. Robert A. Maheu was born On 30 October 1917 in Waterville, Maine. He graduated fron Holy Cross College in 1940 and is married with four children. He was employed as a Special Agent with the FBI from 1940 to 1947, and upon re- “Signing from the Bureau, formed a private enterprise doing business as "Dairy Dream Products." This venture culminated in bankruptcy in 1952. He thea re-entered Government service with the Small Business Adninistration in Washington, D. c., and was appointed Special Assistant to the Administrator with the specific duty of Director. of Security. In February of 1954, he was forced to resign from SBA because of political reasons, determined to be the result of backing the wrong ‘political party in the election. He then set up his own investigative organization known as Robert A. Mahou Associates, Mr. Mahou was recruited by the Office of Security in March of 1954. He was previously known to Mr. Robert H. Cunningham (deceased) who Was, at that tine, Chief, Special Security Division, through their nutual employnent by the | FBI. Cunninghaa saw in Maheu a covert asset who could be utilized by the Office in extremely sensitive cases. “With the approval of the Director of 5ecurity, Subject was offered Security. He apreed to this and immediately took steps to move out of his area, where he rented desk space in a suite | occupied by Carmine S, Bellino, a former PBI agent and CPA. In July of 1954, Maheu was engaged by “British shipping interests” to check on Aristotle Onassis! activities while ; i in the United States. This included technical coverags of Onassis’ New York office. -It was later learned that the principal “British interest" was Stavros Niarchus and thar the ultimate goal of this task was to scrap the Onassis/ Saudi oil deal. Maheu took the job but conditioned his , acceptance with the fact that he would do nothing inimical | to the U. S. Government. Any information developed of interest i to the United States was to be passed by Mahev to the appro- i priate Government agency. ie LENT SE it MOLL AE Res me ETO ad oe ROB arse. Ca Rene ol se aR that TENE Ie FER EO nt Rin tr tite EE LEE * F a Po Fea. «Seen CC ee eRe 14-00000 During this operation Maheu had his staff prepare a paper citing dangers to U. S. sconomy and trade resulting -from the Onassis deal. Through contacts in FOA, Maheu had Harold Stassen read this paper in the National Security Council on 22 June 1954. During this same pericd Maheu briefed Scott McLeod, Assistant Secretary of State for Security and Consular Affairs on the project. McLeod agreed to furnish State commo and pouch facilities subject to Jonn Foster Dulles' approval. Additionally, Maheu briefed J. Edgar Hoover and Vice President Nixon. In August of 1954, Maheu advised this Office of his rela- tionship with Niarchus. NEA Division was contacted end : expressed interest in this matter. They were put in touch with Maheu and furnished him a como channel,-a pouch system and operational guidance. International litigation erupted as a result of the Onassis/Niarchus matter, and.as a result of Niarchus claiming Government privilege in the case, the Agency was subsequently identified as being the Government agency involved. Files of this Office reflect extensive correspondence furnished us by the Office of General Counsel in 1956 regarding the Onassis matter. On 16 August 1954 Subject was granted a covert security, clearance for utilization as an agent under Project TWIXT. in the Near East. On 30 August 1954 he was granted a sinilar clearance to permit his use in the United States as a covert associate under Project LPHIDDEN. In November of 1957, a - cable from Ciudad Trujillo indicated that Mr. Maheu had allegedly been involved in a violation of the Mann Act in procuring and transporting prostitutes for President Sukarno . during Sukarno's state visit to the United States in 1956. Nr. Maheu contacted this Office to advise that the allegations were without foundation and stated that he would take steps immediately to have his attorney sée that appropriate (Dominican officials would retract the charges. This was subsequently done. Edward Bennett Williams acted as Maheu's lawyer in this matter. . _ In 1957 information was received indicating that during . President Sukarno's visit to Moscow in the fall of 1956, he was introduced to a Soviet woman within the Kremlin. He had an affair with her against the admonitions of his advisers. It was reported that the Soviets took detailed films of the affair and that a copy was sent to the PKI. In June of 1957 Al Ulmer and'Samuel Halpern, FE Division, contacted the 14-00000 Director of Security and outlined a project wherein they envisioned a film being made simulating this affair. It was planned that clips from this film would be inserted in a leaflet for distribution throughout Southeast Asia sug- gesting that Sukarno was compromised by the Soviets. In July of 1957, Robert Maheu was given this assignment. He utilized a trusted male employee of this organization (since : deceased) and his fiance. Maheu after an intensive make-up : course, administered the make-up to the participants himself, i utilizing available pictures and descriptions of the subjects : as a guide. He hired a studio where he was given detailed instruction on the use of the lights and camera. Waen the. film was taken, only Haheu and the two participants were in the studio. The project known as “Happy Days,” was never completed and the film was not distributed. . Files.of this Office reflect that during the 1958-1959 period, FE Division was put in touch with Maheu by this 2! Office for essistance in another operation relating to : i President Sukarno. This project was originated in Mey 1958 : hen FE Division initially contacted the Director of Security and briefed him on the project known as GIARPSTAR. Basically, the project capitalized on President Sukarmo's ‘known weakness for Caucasion women. Robert Moheu was given the assigament ' to locate a female-candidate. He advised that 3 proninsnt ‘attorney and “man about town," Res er come UD with a qualified woman. iiijgsiime was. ig ‘ favorable results and given a CSA on'@ July 1558 Dut was not made witting of CIA interest. The female candidate was - , a well-to-do widow, approximately 35 years of age, resident ofan. considered to be highly intelligent and extremely attractive: In August of 1958, the Project HARPSTAR plan was concurred in by the COPS and the DCI. , ; i in September of 1953, Maheu and James O'Connell, of this Office, met with Oggi in New York City. Saige was briefed on Agency interest in the matter. Later in September Maheu met with ; in New York City under his true name and told her of governnental interest. peie ns Heheu's true ideatity having hesy introduced to hin socially. “by age. On the same day (25 September 1953), was introduced to Joseph Smith, FE Bivision (known to bota . i and Maheu as Joseph Sims). pili was briefed on the assignment, ‘Indicated that she understood exactly what was . j w ee 5 Be pean astern = enemas Brera nan sev, Mie t RE RY oe aot PERI TR R Pe tee eS 8 Ae I al BO ANG HA TAT Roe SRT TE Es 14-00000 expected of her and stated that she could leave the country in 45 @ays. On 24 September 1953 “Sins” afain met with . at which tine she was told she would be acconpanied a temale traveling companion, Clizabeth Hogarth (actually @lizabeth Warter, FE Division). mwas told that “iiozarth" would ostensibly be her secretary but would be, in fact, the person she would took to for direction. ‘by Records of this Office do not reflect any of the activities of fies during the course of her mission. It is known that she did meet Sukarno, but due to unfortunate timing thar had hin leaving his country on official business, she had Little time to cultivate hin. Conseqjvently, the purpose of the nission was not fulfilled. The last kaoxvn contacteg@@@M had with the Agency was in the form of a tele- Phone cail on 12 April 1961 when she called on a sterile line ané talked to Mr. Hugh Tovar, who. she knew-as George Uienry. She advised that one “had asked her to sive a party for President Sukarao who would be in Los Angeles on 21 April’ 2961. wanted to know whether the Agency was interested in spousoring this party. A negative response was given. : . In June of 1959, a covert security approval vas Assued for the use of Naheu by IO Division in order for hin to be approached and advised of Agenty interest in International Labor. Files of this Office do not reflect whether or not this was done. On 7 Cctober 1939 a covert security approval was granted for Mr. Maheu'’s use in the United States. The request for approval indicated that Subject might be employed . by the Xing of Jordan\to handle Jordanian public relations in the United States. Mr. Maheu's later involvencat in the pro- curement of feminine companionship for King Hussein Guring thé latter's state visit to the United States is -set forth in Attachment A. 7 : In August o£ 1969, Richard M. Bissell, the then DD/P contacted the Director of Security regarding the Roselli matter. Details concerning this are set forth in Attachnent 3. In 1966 information was received by the Agency indicating that the Senate Administrative Practices Subcommittee, under the chairmanship of Senator Edward V. Lon » had advised Maheu that his testimony was dosired concerning his relationship with Onassis, Savros Niarchos, Sam Giancana and B : ga The Subcommittee interest was invasion of privacy 14-00000 a a oe ore LAIOR ewes. oct nau. ratrrice oi ROIS, 1 Bremer Teese enteral MRE aM tae particularly the use of audio devices by private investigators. In July of 1966, Senetor Long was alerted to the fact that the Agency had had sensitive operational contacts with Maheu. Senator Long was told that the Agency had used Maheu over the years on a number of occasions but that he had never been asked to engage in any wiretapping and had never engaged in any such activities on our behalf. Office of Security files do not indicate whether or not Mahen did appeer before this Subcommittee, although it appears that he cid not, In January of 1971, in light of the involvement of Maheu in a suit between executives of the Huphes Company and Haheu, the Director of Security recommended to the DCI that all existing clearances with Maheu and Associates be terminated. The BCI concurred in. this recommend2tion. Files of this Office reflect that Subject’s company, Mahen and Associates, cooperated with the Agency in supporting the activities of an LPGLOBE agent, Michael G, Nerhigs, in Ecuador. - A memorandum from the Chief, Central Cover Staff to the Inspeator General dated 19 Cctober 1973, delineates the relationship between CCS and Robert Maheu and Asssciates, Information regarding the possibility that Subject was invelved in a leak of information concerning a sensitive DBD/S§T Special Projects Staff project is set forth in Attachnont C. Subject's son Peter Robert Maheu was a staff employes of the Agency and of this Office from 1963 to 1964. He was a.clerical employes. In February of 1969, Peter Maheu was granted a cavert security approval as an employee of Maheu and Associates for use on Project QKENCHANT. ; r 14-00000 and Miss GRE became intimate friends. it was indicated i that King ‘Hussein desired to continue his friendship with =: . stay in New_York City fron 14 through 18. April 1959, 7] SUBJECT: Robert Mahen'- Xing Hussein Incident - 1. In connection’ with the official. State visit of “Sing Bussein from 16 March through 18 April 1959, th zzice of Security WaS Tequested to render special support. Qanine the Los Angeles and Maw York phases of the tour. _.. According to NEA*‘personnel Messrs: Norman Paul, Fred LavPush and ¥Yiltias Aras, King Hussein was especially desirous of . emale companionship during his Los Angeles visit and-it we S requested that arprepriate arrangements be made through 2-controlled source of the Office in” order to assure a satisfied visit. . , - ae . 2. On. 3 ‘Aoril 1959 Mr. ‘Robert Maheu, a cleared Office ‘ef Security contact, was asked to arrange a party for King Hussein at Los Angeles, California. This was done by Nr. Meheu through Mr. Giz. Mr. ewe is 2 prominent. BEES attorney and Maemeppemt fisure pre- -. + viously graated a covert security approval for use oy FE Bivist on. _ By pre-arrangenent, during the course of this - arty Sing Hitsseiz, was introduced to Saami RB, 2 part-. . tine screen ard stage actress. For the ds uration of Xing Hussein's stay in Los Angeles ,‘\3 throngh 7 April 1959, he by Nr. Lafresh; who was integrated into the State party, Hiss. ED and that he wished te meet with her during his- 3. Of I3 April 1959, srrangements were. made to rent the - hone of me. an Office of Security source, at Long Beach, Long Island, for the period 14 through 13: — April” 1959. - The home was to be used as a confidentisl meeting place for Miss G@3mm. and King Hussein. At the sane time . ook Ge was registered at the Hotel Barclay, ALL East Sth Street, New York City, under the ganoe. of Mrs. Sa Same of Ei Paseo, Texas. The publicity toughing on the elatisnship had becoue 2 more pointed sincés/Gone publicity tion had been made of the SSE be ckground of Miss SaaEms. a 1} April 1959 Mr. LaTrash. and\Miss @@MME™ were transported to the " Gemawstiies hon on Long Isiand which was taken over-as : Ree wR es 14-0000 . N le ‘ ‘ ae > . . _ the neeting piace for Ning ‘Hussein and Wiss Gee. Lete " the seme day, by pre-arrangenent, two Department of Stat Security Agents, a New York City police lieutenant and 2 hired chauffeur arrived with King Hussein. Miss GRR - renained at..the site through i8 April 1359, and King i ‘end his” patty, visited each evening and remained for about four to five hours. . 4. During the stay at the Long 5each site, Miss mm ‘discussed the publicity in the case at some length with the - Security representatives.--She Speculated about the possible sources of certain personal information that she felt had been Leaked to the press. Additionally she spake of her eep feeling for King: Russein and comiented on how Gaggmm WammmmY initialiy sought her out to serve as a party com- panioa for the Xing. At the time she said she was unclear : as to just what pent.Mr. Sim wanted her to play. In . attempting: to clarify ‘his case Mr. Tata said, "I am o° os esse. + _ employed by the CIA: We want you to go te bed with hin.” . Miss Gi! said she rejected the proposal but. finally went to the party. She became auite taken with (Wing Hussein and found him to be most charming. oa : . 5- All personal contacts by Security representotives . in this case were under atias and ‘implied State Department ° - affiliation. There is no record or indication in any of the - files in this case that involves Robert, Maheu by name of - . reference. t is believed that Mr. Maheu was never intro- ‘duced to Miss WREERB, and as fer as can be determined . QM “fronted” for ali arrangements. Offices of Security . investigation conducted variously frem 25 May through . 17 September 1959 of @auMMMR reflected no substantive derogetory information regarding her. - . . - wera : i 3 cite Se ae cane Meat dt RBar im a % ae a ce canta RR net end ee mt SUBJECT: The Johnny Roselli Matter 1. In August of 1960 Mr, Richard Bissell approached . o! the then Director of Security, Colonel Sheffield Edwards, | - to determines if the Office of Security had any assets that might assist in a sensitive mission requiring gangster-type. action. The mission target was Fidel Castro. Because of : its extreme sensitivity, only = small group was knowledgeable of the project. The DCI was briefed and gave his approval. - Colonei J. C. Xing, Chief, WH Division, was briefed, but all - details were concealed Fron any of the JMWAVE officials. : . Certain TSD and Communications personnel participated in... : the initial planning Stages but were not witting of the. - purposes of the mission. ; on oot '2. Robert Maheu was contacted, briefed generally on the project, and requested to ascertain if he could develop en entree inte gangster elements. “ir. Maheu advised that he had met one Johnny Roselli on Several occassions whila visiting Las Yegas. Maheu knew Roselli caly casually through Clients. but had been given to understand that Roselli.was a high. ranking member of the “Syndicate” and controlled 211 of tha " ice making machines on tho Strip. Maheu was asked to. __ approach Roselli, who knew Mahan as a personal relations - executive handling domestic and foreign accounts. Maheu coe was to tell Roselli that he had recently been obtained by a cli ent who represented several international business firms which... - | were suffering heavy Financial losses in‘Cuba as a result of © Castro's action, These firms were convinced that Castro's Yenoval was the answer to the problen and were willing to | Oo pay 2 price of $150,000 for its successful accomplishment. Se, It was to be made clear to Roselli that the United States . Lot Government was not and should not become aware of this = 9 -- operation. Le, . ; sot a 3. The pitch was made to Roselli on 14 September 1960 at the Hilton Plaza Hotel, New York City. Mr. James O'Connell, £fice of Security, was present diring this meeting sad was identified to Roselli as an employee of Maheu. O'Connell - actively served as Raselli'’s contact until Hay 1962 at which time he phased out due to an overseas assignment. Roselli's RDNA B A mete tee nthe at PT bE tie BRIER ter, Aa ee Pets A ta A me ce mene 14-00000 , , Se ° . 1 . “t ey 7 : +? . . . , ” . . J . . 4 initial reaction was to avoid getting involved, but through _Maheu's persuasion he agreed to introduce him to a friend, Sam Gold... Roselli made it clear that ne would not want any money for his part, and he believed that Gold would feel the same way. Neither of these individuals were.ever paid out of Agency fonds. — - cota 4. During the week of 25 September 1960, Haheu was introduced to Gold at the Fontainebleau Hotel, Miami Beach. During this meeting Mahe: also met an individual identified” — as "Joe" who.was supposedly a courier operating between an -.« »,Havena and Miami. Several weeks later Maheu saw photographs 1 to£ both of these individuals in the Sunday Supplemental - Parate. They were identified as Momo Salvatore Giancana and Santos Trafficant. Both were on the list of the . Attornsy General's ten most wanted men. Giancana was - described as the Chicago Chieftan of the Cosa Nostra and successor to Al Capone. Trafficant was identified as the | Cosa Nostra boss of Cuban cperations. Mahen called this — ' OFFice immediately upon ascertaining this information. . : 5. --In discussing the possible methods of accomplishing _the mission, Sam suggested that they not resort to firearms “but that he be. furnished some type of potent pill that could be placed in Castro's food or drink. Gold indicated that he had a prospective nominee in the person of Juan Orta, a . Cuban offieial who had been receiving kickback payments for -- a gambling interest and who still had access to Castro and: -. = was still in a financial bind. a - es . 6. TSD was renzested to preduce six pills of high=-* — - lethal content which were then delivered to Orta by “Joe.” o After several weeks of reported atrempts,.Orta apparently ..-.2 got cold feet and asked out of the assigmment. He suggested. _ another. Candidate who made several attempts without success. "Joe" then indicated that Dr. Anthony Verona, ons of the - 9°. principal officers in the Cuban exile junta, had become -- = = isaffected with the apparent ineffectual progress of the - = ‘ junta and was willing to handle the mission through his. own resources. Verona asked that he be given $10,000 for organization expenses end reauested..$1,000 worth of communi- cations equipment. Dr. Verona's potential was.never fully exploited as the mission was cancelled shortly after the -- i -Bay of Pigs épisode. Verona was advised the offar was withdrawn, and the pills were retrieved. At the height of . EBT AEB ae ame cht net ree ms ee Rr RET tt Se oe 14-00000 ‘was discovered in the proesss, arrested, and taken to the - $echnician. “Uh February 1962 the Director of Security — our requast, prosecutioa was dropped. . if someone did not intercede on Roselli's behalf, he would “ment and it was decided that the Agency would not in any way pares the project negotiations, Gold | expressed concern about - who he learned ‘W Was aati; CSET, Gold asked Maheu to put 2 bug in. Meelis. xcoom to determine the extent of with © -. The technician involved in the assignment sheriff's office for questioning, He called Maheu in the presence of sheriff's personnel and informed him that he had been detained. Subsequently, the Department of Justit: announced its Ss intention to prosecete Maheu slong with the briefed tha then Attorney General Robert Kennedy on the circun- -— Stauces leading up to Makeu’s involvement in the wiretap. At . wale Tr ‘May 1962 Mr. William Harvey took over es Roselli's , case officer and iz is not known if he was used officially . ‘Erom that point on. It was subsequently | learned from ihs - FRI that Roselli had been convicted on six counts involving . ‘illegal entry into. the United States sone time during ” oot Novenver 1967. “On 2 December 1968 Roselli along with four . BPs other individuals was convicted of conspiracy to cheat a + members of the Friar's Club of $400,000 in a rigged gin - . “Yunmny.game. Nr. Harvey reported his contacts with Roselli. to this office during November and December of 1967 and . January ‘of 1968. Roselli was facing deportation at that tine but feit that he yould win an appeal. . -. 3. On i7 Novenber 1970 Mr. Maheu called’ James O'Connell,--* -Roselii’s first case officer, to advise that Maheu’s attorney, -- Ed Morgan had received a call from Thomas Waddin, Roselli'’s . attorney, who stated that ail avenuas of appeal had been ex mt hausted and Roselli faced deportation: Waddin indicated that ot make a complete expose of his activity with the Agency. On 13 November 1970 Mr. Helms was briefed on this latest develop- _ assist Roselli. Mahen was advised of the Agency's position ..- and was in complete agreement. -He stated that he was not concerned about any publicity as it affected hin personally should Roselli decide to tell all. Subsequently Roselli or somgone on his behalf furnished Jack Anderson detaiis of the operation. Anderson wrote two columns regarding this operation 3 . 3 . . - . 7 va @ . 7 . . . - on 13 January 1971 and 23 February 1971: Roselli-was last known to be in the Federal Penitentiary in Seattle, © . . 4 Washington. _ ; . : a SO . - . - 4 ° e . > - * . . : ro - . ’ - ° » A : 1 - - / _ articles Phelan reported variously that: Howard Hughes _ eo . reportedly claimed that one of his assignments for Hughes was to get.ths CLA. to serve as a cover for the billionazira's . SUBJECT: Special Projects Staff Matter - , _ ‘ On 25 June 1974: Me Paul Evans, “Security officar, : special ‘projects Staff, DD/S§T, requested that Office of © |. - Security records be. checked regarding a Mr. James R. Phelan: -- and Mr.. Vallace Torner.whe were both . of interest in connection . with a sensit tive. SPS_ activity, - oo. clas on tee ee x A check ‘of FBI and offi ics of Security records indicat ed that Mr. Phelan had written an unfavorable -= — article about the FBI in 1965 which appeared in the Saturday | ; Evening Post..-Additionally Mr. Phelan testified as a defense «- = witness in the Clay Shaw conspiracy trial on 26 February 1968... A review of Agency iibrary sources reflected that Mr. Phelan . - a ' hed published a number of articles. Mr. Carl Duckett, DD/ S&T, has speculated that Mr. Robert Maheu might have been the source of Mr, Phelan's informeticn. Several DD/S&T officers .- recalled that in approximat ely December of 1970.HMr. James -. O'Connell received a telephone cail from Mr. Maheu in which - Hr. Maheu complained that the Agency had embarked on a. new. project with the Howard Hughes organization and had not- Lt gone through hin.. A review of various articles by wr. Phelan ..- -indicated that he had written several stories concerning. - Maheu's defamation suit against Howard Hughes. -In these -— : might have paid Robert Maher $520,000 a year because of.. Mahen'’s Central Intelligence Agency expertise; Maheu eo ts activities, 2 request which Maheu says he-refused to carry | ' out: and Maheu claimed that Howard Hughes | suggested that ‘Maheu work out an arrangenent waereby he. or. bis organization could become a front for the CIA, another: suggestion » which ._. Maire clains he didnot > undertake- os Tee ye tL;14-00000 104-10122-10147) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | oe . - a . -. cd File 24 November 1964 Chief, Alien Affairs Staff . he Santiago ARGUELLES Izquierdo {AAC«-1130) - #244420{ C) Angel Manuel BENITEZ Benitez (AAC--1131) - #744305(C) Alicio CALAS Roque (AAC---1132) - #7371 75(C) Alfredo FERNANDEZ Martinez (AAC-1133) - #737177( Cc) Conrado FERNANDEZ Morales (AAC-1134) - #272300( C) Felix FUENTES Games (AAC-1135) - #284891( C) Orlando GARCIA Duarte { AAC--1136) - #218729( C) Jose Angel GONZALEZ Castro ( AAC--1137) - #223976(C) Guillermo GONZALEZ Lazo (AAC-1138) - #733496(C) Jose Severino HERNANDEZ Martinez (AAC-1139) - #283744(C) Pedro LOPEZ Cristo ( AAC-1140) - #284375(C) Raimundo MARTINEZ Gonzalez (AAC-1141) - €284148(C) Ricardo Anibal MORALES Navarrete ( AAC-1142) - #380858(C) Alberto PEREZ Martinez ( AAC-1143) - #223124( C) Manuel A, RIVERO Colona (AAC-1144) - #228117(C) Jorge Delio RODRIGUEZ Triana (AAC-1145) - #744303(C) Mario Andres ROMERO Arias ( AAC--1146) - #277933( C) Jorge Luis SILVA Del Monte (AAC-H147) - #218751{ C) Juan Cornelio TAMAYO Cordovi (AAC-1148) - #218752(C) 1. On 24 November 1964 Bob Gambino, SOD/SO, called and said that subjects will probably be returning to the U.S. around 30 November 1964, | [cin Sec. 03 | [05 oi. Sec 2. On 25 November 1964 Jack Scanian) SOD/SO, advised i that the arrival would be in the first week of December 1964. 3. On.30 November 1964/Jack sestian dvised that all but AAC-1142 and AAC--1143 would‘be returning on about 5. ‘December 1964 at midnight on an Agency C-118. 4, On 1 December 1964(Geanlon)adviaed that subjects (except 1142 and 1143) would probably arrive at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., at about midnight on 5 December 1964 on an Air frce C-l18 06 with tail number 3820. He said that Bob Gambino, (Arthur Garza) @ (filliam Robertson)and Dr. \James Fearon) M.D,, would also be ob ob 14-0000 aboard. He said that the plane would also have loose cargo as follows: outboard motors, radio beacons, silence weapons, other weapons, commo gear, medical equipment and parachute drop equipment. He also said Gambino may be carrying some TSD material. He stated that James Fitchett, under (Air Force )32 cover, would be there to transfer subjects to a C-54 for further travel Eo Camp Pickett and that Fitchett would meet the Customs and I&NS men at Base Cperations. 5. On 2 December 1964 1 advised Lawrence Fleishmann, Deputy Comznissioner of Custome of the arrival and told him of the type of gear aboard. He said he would have his man meet Fitchett at Base Operations. 6. On 3 December 1964, I advised Frank Braden, I &NS, of the arrival of subjects and the other passengers and that Customs and his man should meet James Fitchett at Base Ops. W. M. Knott OS/AAS/WMK: es 4 Dec 64 py ete ne 14-00000;144 104-10122-10279 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 - a @ EYES onty” HO SECRET 4 OCT 1973 SUBJECT: Robert A. Maheu 1. Robert A. Maheu was born on 30 October 1917 in Waterville, Maine. He graduated from Holy Cross College, Worcester, Massachusetts in 1940. He is married and has four children. . 2. He was employed as a Special Agent with the Federal Bureau.of Investigation from 1940 to 1947. Upon resigning from the Bureau a venture into private enter- prise culminated in bankruptcy in 1952. Subsequent to his bankruptcy, he was employed as Special Assistant to ' the Administrator, Small Business Administration with the . specific duty of Director of Security. In February 1954, he was forced to resign for political reasons from this position. He then established his own investigative organization known as Robert A. Maheu Associates, and rented desk space in a suite occupied by Carmine S. Bellino, a formor Bureau Agent, Certified Public Accountant, and currently employed on Capitol Hill with one of the Congres- sional Committees. - 3. Mr. Maheu's organization successfully handled a number of prestige accounts, including Niarchos, Schenley Distillers, New York Central Railroad, United Steel Workers Union, and ultimately Howard Hughes. Although he has main- tained offices in Washington, D.C. and Los Angeles, most recently he resided in Las Vegas, Nevada. 4. He was initially recruited by the Office of Secu- rity in 1954 and granted a Covert Security Approval on 30 August 1954. He performed many sensitive assignments for the Office of Security, and also accepted assignments from elements of the predecessor of the Deputy Director for : Operations. an : sf 7 E2 IMPDET CL BY: 061142 EYES ONLY SECRET > 14-00000 S. Some of those assignments included the . following: o6 A. (King Hussein) oe 5. The procuregent of feminine Companionship fo the King)during an official State visit to this country during th eriod 16 March a 1958) sh through 18 April (19 (See attached ab 1--taken from “Fem ly “Jewels” menoran- ‘dum dated 16 May 1973) Johnny Roselli a The use of a momber of the Mafia in an attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro, initiated in August 1960. (See attached Tab 2--taken fron “Fanily Jewels" nenoran- . dum dated 16 May 1973) Cover Various officers of the Clandestine Service met with Mr. Meheu over the y Actual cover uses were Provided for one officer in Mr. Naheu's Washington Office fron Septenbor. 1964 to June 1966, and another officer used the uite, Ecusdor\from J August 1968 through over of Maheu Associates representatives in 6. No contact has been made with Nr. termination of the above cover arrangenent, 3 Atts 1 December 1970. (See attached Tab 3--Director of Security Memoranduz to the Director of Central Intelligence, dated 20 January 1971) Maheu since the EYES omy 2 Or CAT SEure!;14-aannn 104-10122-10288) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 } 20 May 1971 MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD SUBJECT: Robert D. Peloquin, President International Intelligence, Inc. (INTERTEL) 839 17th Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 20006 : Telephone: (202) 638-2179 The undersigned, seeking an employment-opportunity in the District of Columbia area or in California, was introduced to Mr. Peloquin on May 10, 1971 by former Agency employee, (Alfred A. Pease) who is currently employed by INTERTEL. This unique corporation, probably created in 1970, first came to the attention of the undersigned when it was publicized in The Wall Street Journal on May 4, 1970. There had been an earlier article on April 26, 1970 in the financial section of The Sunday New York Times. The new concern has its headquarters in Washington, D. C. at the above address which also serves.as the location of Mr. Peloquin's law firm. The Executive Vice President, John D. O'Connell, .a former FBI agent and friend of the undersigned, maintains his office at 375 Park Avenue, . New York City. : At the time of the first publicity, Mr. Peloquin said "His organization will seek to provide the necessary guidance and information to help legitimate companies from blundering into mergers, joint ventures or acquisitions with concerns secretly controlled by the Mafia and other mobsters." For the past ; . several years, Mr. Peloquin, as Vice President of the corpora. .. oo tion which controls INTERTEL, Resorts International, Inc., had pbeen in charge of security for Resorts' owned gambling casino on Paradise Island in the Bahamas. He further said that the execu- tives of INTERTEL did not "serve as detectives, '' they will be consultants only. , eRe Excldad from autenati. downgrading ase _ bestossificatiza SECRET gpd 14-00000 The original publicity disclosed that in addition to Washington and Néw York INTERTEL would open offices in Chicago, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, and Canada. Just how many of these offices are pre- sently opened and active is not known, but it is understood from/AlO3 Pease {hat the Philadelphia office will not be opened because of the fact that Mr. J, Shane Creamer is the Pennsylvania Attorney General under a Democratic administration. Creamer was former head of the Pennsylvania Crime Commission. Just why INTERTEL made this change is not known but it would appear that they want no part of Mr. Creamer. In spite of the initial publicity that INTERTEL executives were not would be "detectives, ' it would appear that since December of-1970 much of their active staff working out of the D. C. office have in fact become just exactly that. INTERTEL was engaged by the Hughes Tool Company to conduct a sweeping and exhaustive inves- tigation into the affairs and past activities of Robert A. Maheu. Four or five years ago the Hughes’Tool Company (Howard Hughes himself)« allegedly entered into an oil contract with Robert A. Maheu Associates to perform a variety of services apparently undefined for the amount of $525,000 per year. Before the end of 1970 Maheu's contract was rescinded and attorneys for the Hughes Tool Company moved quickly to remove him from authority in the Nevada Operations. According to the newspapers this was done at the express request of Mr, Hughes himself. Preliminary litigation appalled this removal but shortly after the first of the year Maheu filed a suit against the Hughes Tool Company for $50 million to which he said he was entitled as damages for the cancellation of his "lifetime contract." It is doubtful that there was any connection between INTERTEL and the Hughes Tool Company prior to early 1971. They were engaged as an investigative unit under a temporary contract to protect the assets of the Hughes Tool Company and to determine just exactly what Robert A. Maheu was up to. The first contract was temporary and indefinite but currently they are operating under a recently - executed five year contract. Howard Hughes reportedly is living in one of the Bahaman hotels owned or operated by Resorts Inter-. national. There are those in Las Vegas who do not look on INTERTEL as the "good guys" on the local scene. The suave, popular Mr. Maheu, even though he was discharged and removed by the Hughes Tool Company, remains a popular figure winning considerable -2- SECRET 14-00000 political influence .in the county as opposed to the city of Las Vegas itself, Maheu is being vociferously defeated by the leading local newspaper, The Las Vegas Sun. President and Publisher Herman M. Greenspun has just concluded a series in The Sun in which he alleges that INTERTEL is in fact a front and instrumentally of organized crime----shocking if true, but not wholly impossible. The working staff for INTERTEL in Vegas is made up predominantly of ex-FBI agents and recently retired employees of the Internal Revenue Service. Peloquin himself is the former Chief of the Justice Department's Crime Strike Force, but little if anything has been publicized regarding the principles for controlling elements of Resorts International and its other subsidiaries. In January 1969 Resorts International made a bold yet futile move to seise control _ of Pan American World Airways by purchasing a 9.7 per cent stock interest, Pan Am naturally screamed and rushed to CAB for advice and support. The intercession of CAB was effective but it is believed that Resorts International did acquire perhaps half the stock that it had originally intended to purchase. The index for The Wall Street Journal for 1969 lists many references to Resorts International including one in October of that year regarding. some bad publicity Resorts had received as a result of their management of the gambling casino on Paradise Island. There should be an abundance of other public information available about Resorts, its officers and principle investors with CAB, SEC and even the American Stock Exchange since it is a public corporation. Snagging the Hughes Tool Company contract to investigate Robert A. Maheu Associates was certainly opportune and the contract is reported to run upward to a million dollars but the company's current role investigating Maheu seems inconsistent with its declared purpose unless Mahev himself is suspected of having been in touch with or ensnared by the Mafia. Local allegations and publicity by The Las Vegas Sun could be ignored as irrelevent and as having no bearing on the Maheu-CIA relationship. Whether the allegations are evidence, it probably would be advisable to read this series of articles carefully. There is a current rumor similar in nature to Greenspun's allegations that recently was indirectly brought to the undersigned's attention during the week of May l0th. AD. C. attorney, Bernard Fensterwald, 927 15th Street, N. W., Washington, D. C. commented to a friend, "It looks like may be the good guys (INTERTEL) are in fact the bad guys with the Mafia connections.'' Fensterwald did not -3- SECRET 14-00000 mention The Las Vegas Sun series but claimed that The Miami Herald and The Washington Post were both about to break stories linking INTERTEL with organized crime. When Maheu hurriedly relinquished his palatial offices which occupied one whole wing of the Frontier Hotel in Las Vegas, according to (al Pe& e, he took ten or twelve packing crates of records with him. In his haste, however, he appeared to over- look a box of 3 x 5 cards that were cross references to some of these records. The INTERTEL investigation, under the guidance of Pedsd and the Hughes Tool Company attorneys, will undertake to establish as nearly as possible exactly what Maheu was doing with his time and with the Hughes fortune. The Hughes attorneys are proceeding on the basis that if Maheu in fact did have a "contract for life,''as he contends, then the Hughes Tool Company was entitled to 100 per cent of his time and "true and faithful ser- -vice.'' At the-outset’and without the records the INTERTEL staff hardly knew where to look or to begin since they suspected kick- backs, siphoning of money into foreign numbered bank accounts and the purchase of false mining claims, just to name a few. Such investigation is costly and tedious but INTERTEL hopes to develop and reconstruct Maheu's pattern of activity from the date he gave up all of his other clients to work for the Hughes Tool Company (Howard Hughes) exclusively. Therefore they will thoroughly scrutinize any and all private deals, foreign or domestic, looking for concealed assets, evidence of kickbacks or foreign numbered bank accounts, etc. Preliminary court action, except to accomplish Maheu's removal, has been slow. Mr. (Peds@ said that the Hughes Tool Company lawyers were in court in Las Vegas on April 18-20, 1971 but additional action or proceedings have been set down for June 25, 1971 and so it will probably ad infinitum. With Hughes resources he can hold out forever but the general consensus is that Maheu is already beginning to feel the financial pinch. peded reported that a recent new business, a consulting service opened by Maheu in Las Vegas, had flopped. It would appear that Maheu first became indirectly associated with Howard Hughes in the early 1950's at a time when Hughes was entangled in extended Senate hearings with the then Senator Brewster of Maine. Maheu did some subcontract investigative work developing material which Mr. Hughes used during these hearings. If it has any significance or bearing to any current problems, Mr.(Robert?3 J. Flynn,)a former Agency employee, could supply all details -4-— SECRET 14-00000 regarding this part of Maheu's life. It was Gye) who informed the undersigned some months ago that when Maheu secured émployment with the former public administration in the 1950's his sponsor was Senator Margaret Chase Smith. : Some time in the early 1960's Maheu closed his D. C. office, picked up Hughes as a sole client and moved to Los Angeles. The undersigned is aware of this because he was in touch with him during the period 1962-1964. Simulggneously the undersigned was working out the details of a(nonofficidl cover rrangement with the Aircraft Division of the Hughes Tool Company in Culver City, California, Mr. Rhea Hopper, Vice President in Charge of the Aircraft Division was the principle cleared witting official. It'is doubtful that details of this arrangement ever reached Mr. Hughes himself but because of Maheu's significant role he was cut in as a pickup for insurance. The undersigned did this himself. The investigative staff of INTERTEL will not be - , in this Maheu investigation alone. Already they have turned certain significant information.over to the Internal Revenue Service. Mr. William A. Kolar, retired Director of the IRS Intelligence : Division, is part of the INTERTEL staff on the scene in Vegas. : The name of Edward P. Morgan, a former FBI agent and prominent D. C. attorney, was mentioned by Mr. (Pease, 95 It seems that at some undisclosed date Morgan was engaged by the Hughes Tool Company. This would have no particular | significance except for two things. (1) Morgan is one of Maheu's closest friends and business associates, (They had their heads together in 1963 in a deal under which they and other investors were trying to gain control of a large Los An ose radio station that had its license rescinded by FCC). (2) Pea wse) said that Morgan is still in the wings making noises to certain unnamed Hughes Tool Company officials to the effect that they had better take it easy on Maheu because of the past involvement with CIA in covert operations. Mr. (@ease)aid not say exactly where he got his information and of course being uninformed was unable to appreciate its significant. It is not known whether Morgan still represents the Hughes Tool Company in any capacity but o3 (Al Pease lisclosed privately to the undersigned that for past services Morgan had been paid almost a million dollars. INTERTEL has studied several approaches to Morgan through ex-FBI channels to discuss this veiled threat but he has not -5- SECRET 14-00000 beer approached. * Certainly this is a strange arrangement if it has been allowed to continue. The Hughes Tool Company. would do well to drop Morgan completely. As INTERTEL attempted to interview him it's doubtful that it would be produc- tive. Just what Morgan might have to do if served with a subpoena is beyond the undersigned's comprehension, It seems reasonable to assume that Morgan picked up the Hughes Tool Company account through his good friend Maheu or his intercession. Naturally the INTERTEL investigators did not find a folder bearing the name Edward P. Morgan but they did find a 3 x 5 card indicating that there had been sucha file. This prompting of Morgan and his approach to the Hughes Tool Company could only have come from one source, Maheu himself. Because he is attorney for the Hughes Tool Company, Morgan could not have been involved. It may never be known just how much Maheu has already told Morgan about his CIA relationship. ; G ---On May 10, 1971 Mr. Peden said that- Robert A. Maheu and Jack Anderson, the syndicated columnist, are known to be involved together in some oil mix deals. INTERTEL is looking into this and all such other similar matters to trace the source and disposition of funds. The recent expose by Jack Anderson regarding Maheu's role in the Cuban Revolution was a deliberate exposure instigated by Robert A. Maheu using his son Peter as an intermediary.j@Pease' P) theory was that Maheu probably thought such publicity would "scare them off.'' The INTERTEL staff is aware of a series of recent contacts and meetings between Peter Maheu and Jack Anderson or a member of his staff. > Mr. (Pease)is prepared to be reasonable in his investiga- tion insofar as CIA interests are concerned but he cannot be - intimidated, cannot ignore logical leads, and will not allow Maheu to use the Agency as a shield. He is prepared to discuss any reasonable approach. In conclusion the undersigned respectfully requests that his name not be connected with any of the information reported herein. Much of it was volunteered by an old friend, i Pease) ™3 in confidence and this confidence must be respected. Whether an employment offer is forthcoming is inconsequential. John G. Southard SECRET;14,00 104-10122-10294 [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | ‘ ¥ . ey a , - * 2 * “8 ( . ‘ oe : | . . . g JAN 168 MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Security SUBJECT : TYLER, Lyon L. 1. On 5 January you queried the Undersigned as to his knowledge of Mr. Tyler. For your information I have known Mr. Tyler, who is’ known as "Slug", for about fifteen years. He is an attorney and a former FBI agent, and my association with him stems from the Society of Former Agents of the FBI. Most of the information set forth below was derived from personal contact with Slug over these years. . * 2. Mr. Tyler entered the Bureau in 1939 and remained in the Bureau until 1948. He served as a Special Agent and worked in Bureau Headquarters at the time of his departure. Upon resigning from the Bureau he went to work on Capitol Hill and according to Slug he worked for Lyndon B. Johnson, then Senator Johnson. As JI recall, he itidicated that he was in charge of Senator Johnson's files and records. He also knows a great number of Gongressmen and Senators on the Hill and his present office contains autographed pictures of President Johnson, Vice President Humphrey and many prominent Senators and Representatives. 3. Some time later Slug left his employment on the Hill and started into the private practice of law. He at first shared an office with the firm of Welch, Mott and Morgan. His contact with this firm came about through his association with Edward P. Morgan who is also a former Bureau agent who served during the years 1940-1947. Apparently, Mr. Tyler felt that he could not work with Morgan and subsequently he started his own law practice in the Investment Building. The name of the firm is Tyler and Stetter. This is a loose arrangement since Stetter, also a former Bureau agent, is mixed up in real estate and investigative activities as well as law practice. 14-00000 zy s 4. One source of Tyler's income has been the Agency. He has been utilized by Central Cover Staff, the Office of Security and the Office of General Counsel to my knowledge. I do not think he has been heavily involved in operations, but rather has furnished backstopping and safehouse support. On at least one occasion I raised the question ; as to whether we were not using Tyler too much. In view of your interest! -- I have asked for a summary of our association with Tyler. _ 5. Tyler has been married twice and his current spouse is named Peggy. At one time she was personal secrétary to the Secretary of _ Commerce and has always held a position of executive secretary to highly placed people in government. Slug himself is very affable and is extremely well known. He has been active in the Ex-Agents Society and may have had some minor involvements in politics. 6. Edward Morgan, who is mentioned above, is awell known «# attorney dealing primarily with cases coming before the FCC. He is reportedly very wealthy and Tyler told me at one time that Morgan obtained his funds through Oklahoma oil men. It seems that he represented a number of southwest oil men in obtaining a franchise for TV stations in that area. He was given part of his fee in oil leases which proved to be of great value. On one occasion in about 1954] talked with Ed Morgan regarding the possibility of a national ex-FBI agents convention in Washington, D. C. At that time Morgan indicated that he would be willing to put up $250, 000 to back a convention in Washington. He made this offer to indicate that he was certain such a convention would be a success and no financial loss would occur from such a convention. 7. In about 1951 Ed Morgan left his law practice to take over as Chief of Enforcement of the Office of Price Stabilization. At that time he hired a number of former FBI agents and reportedly was accused of proselyting agents from the Bureau. It is common gossip among ex-agents that the Director of the FBI was extremely miffed at Morgan's action and would have nothing to do with him. There was also talk among ex-agents that the FBI had thwarted his attempts to become president of the national ex-agents organization. (He ran for the presidency and was defeated in 1957.) . 8. The above is set forth for your information. Zan, SFE “Charles W. Kane Deputy Director of Security;14-00000 104-10122-10307| _ . | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | , .. =” o . 4 - weet MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Security 4 May 1967 SUBJECT : MORGAN, Edward P. 1. I first met Ed Morgan in about 1952 or 1953 through our association with the Society of Former Agents of the FBI. Both Ed and I served on the Executive Committee of the Washington Chapter of that Society in 1953-54 and both Ed and I were interested in having the Ex-Agents National Convention in Washington, D. C. At that time Jim McInerny was President of the Washington Chapter. 2. I went overseas in 1955 and I have seen Ed possibly four or five times since my return in 1957. While I have been active in the Society, Ed Morgan has not been. The last time I saw Morgan was in January 1967 at an Ex-Agents dinner. All of my association with Morgan has been through the Ex-Agents, and I have never been in contact with him socially other than through the Society. 3. The following information is hearsay concerning Ed Morgan. I have reason to believe that all the information is true, but I do not know it on a first hand basis. Ed Morgan served in the Bureau from 1940 to 1947. He isa tall, personable, nice looking individual and in the Bureau he ended up in the Training Division. He used to give lectures to the new Agents classes and the National Academy classes, and through his speaking ability he came to the attention of Director, J. Edgar Hoover. At the end of the war Morgan left the Bureau to enter private law practice. 4. According to rumor, Morgan entered the field of Federal Communications practice. His firm became well known in this field and the firm name is Welch, Mott & Morgan. Rumor is that he obtained TV franchises for a number of oil men in the Middle West, and took his pay in oil leases. He made a-great deal of money in a short period of time and is reportedly worth at least a million dollars. wee ze 5. At the time of the Korean War, Morgan accepted an appointed position in the Office of Price Stabilization. He headed the investigative and compliance unit of OPS and in this position he hired a number of Ex-Agents. It was in this job that he reportedly ran afoul of the Bureau. Morgan apparently proselyted a great number of Bureau Agents at higher salaries than the Bureau made and this made Director Hoover furious. A few years later a rumor was started that Morgan hoped to replace Hoover; the Director was even more furious. I do not know this for a fact, but it has been speculated that Morgan is persona non grata with the Bureau. 6. Morgan continued active work in the Society of Former Agents between 1955 and 1957. In 1957 he ran for the office of National President of the Society. He was defeated in his bid for this office and was very bitter about his defeat. For the past ten years he has not attended more than two or three local meetings, and he does not participate in Society activities. It was rumored that Morgan blamed his defeat on the Bureau, stating that he was defeated because the Bureau had black-listed him. 7. According to rumor Morgan moves in fairly high circles in the District of Columbia. I believe he belongs to the Touchdown Club and I also believe he belongs to one of the more exclusive country clubs in the area. He drinks, but I have never seen him intoxicated. Other | than the items mentioned above, I have never heard anything unfavorable concerning him. There are a number of people in the Agency who knew him and worked with him at the Bureau. I feel certain that(Erank Holmes)- would know him fairly well, as well as Bill Harvey, Ron MacMillan, Herman Horton and Glenn Fields. Lyon L. (Slug) Tyler, who has been utilized by Central Cover)for a number of years, formerly worked for Morgan in his law firm, but broke away from the firm because of some disagreement. Tyler would probably know a great deal concerning Morgan's personal habits. It should be remembered, however, that because Morgan's law practice is primarily an administrative practice. before the FCC, most of his business associates would be in the broad- casting and news business. "Charles W. Kane;14-00000 104-10122-10344) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992) * 7 EVES ONLY 7 June 1966 SUBJECT: MAHEU, Robert A. 1, Robert A. Mabeu, a personnel relations executive and former F.B.1. Agent, has been utilized by the Office of Security on many sensitive assignments since the early fifties. He has also on several occasions been cleared for use by the DD/P in various capacities. He does business.as Robert A.. Maheu, Asso- ciates, and maintains offices in Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, California, where he is now residing. 2, It has come to our attention that the Senate Subcommittee investigating wiretapping activities (Long Committee) has expressed considerable interest in Maheu, He has never been asked to per- form any technieal surveillance on our behalf. 3. The first inkling we had that the Long Committee was interested in Maheu came to our attention through the OGC. Mr. Lawrence Houston advised that Walter Yeagley, Assistant Attorney General, Internal Security Division, had casually mentioned to him that he had been advised by Raymond A. Taggart, an AID o employee, that he may be called upon to testify before the Long Committee regarding his activities while employed by Maheu (1954-55), 4, The only significant association the Agency had with Maheu . during that period involved the struggle between two Greek industrial giants, Stavros Niarchus and Aristottle Onassis. Maheu had been retained as a trouble shooter for Niarchus. Onassis had just cone cluded a pact with King Saud which would allow him to control approxi- mately 90 percent of the ofl shiprnents out of Saudi Arabia. In con- sumating the deal, he allegedly employed every trick in the book. His achievement caused much consternation among the British, German, and American interests. Niarchus also realized as a result of this the balance of power and influence weighed heavily in EVES GHLY | SECRET Re Riratant nF twee Mees oe. a - 14-0000 - Been nr So SEBRET. - EYES ONLY favor of Onassis in their own private battle. It was this mutual concern of the United States and Niarchus that set the stage for a joint venture. Niarchus supplied the money, personnel, and documents; the Agency furnished the communications, courier facilities, and direction in the form of our Commo channel, pouch system, and the NEA Division's expertise and guidance. S. Spyridon Catapodis, a Greek Broker, who had an ax to grind against Onassis ae a result of being manipulated out of a handsome commission he believed due him for his interceasion with certain Saudi officials to secure oil rights for Onassis, spear-— headed a campaign to publicize Onaseis' high-handed methods of operation. This triggered off all sorts of international litigations which erupted into suits and countersuits. by all parties concerned. Of particular note was the case of Catapodis vs. Onassis, which suit was filed in New York State. While Niarchus was being exam- ined before trial by Onassis! attorney, he claimed Government privilege in answering certain questions, This tact was challenged by the attorney and pursued to the point that eventually it was re- corded in the briefs filed by both the plaintiff and the defendent that CIA was, in fact, the Government agency of interest. Close coor- dination was maintained during this period with Justice and State. At our request a representative of the U. &. Attorney's Office in New York monitored all of the Hearings. Mr. Houston is intimately familiar with the actions in this case, and copies of his memoranda pertinent to it are contained in his files. _ §. The Security file on Subject contains a Covert Security Clearance issued 16 August 1954 at the request of NE/2, Att: William Miller, for Maheu's use on Project TWIXT. Other inter- ested DD/P personnel were identified as William F.:Rowland, < ting Chief, NEA Division; George Prussing; Walter Snowden} and Charles Woliamson. : . 6 . 7. Mr. Maheu was contacted to determine whether the Com- mittee had been in touch with him. He stated he was not aware of their interest in him. When the Taggart conversation was men- tioned, he promptly replied that it must be the Onassis operation they are looking into. He recalled that he had Onassis' New York office "covered"! sometime during the period. John Frank, a EVES OSLY cECHET 14-00000 eS SEORET _ HIES OWLY former staff employee, and then a private investigator, was en- gaged to arrange for the coverage. Maheu could only identify the technician by the name.of Leon. Presumably, this coverage was done as a routine technique to keep the Niarchus interests informed . on Onassis' movements. This was not initiated at the request of any Agency component so far as our records indicate. 8. Subsequently, Maheu advised he had received 2 message from one of the Committee's attorneys named Homme who wanted . to fly out to talk with him. Maheu fended him off by saying he was tied up for the next several days. He then contacted his attorney, Edward P. Morgan, ef Washington, D. C., and it was decided that Morgan would meet him in St. Louis on 24 May for a conference. '9, On Thursday morning, 26 May, Maheu called to advise that he was at tha Madison Hotel, Washington, D. C., and was anxious to talk with us. At his request it was arranged to have Colonel Edwards accompany a member of this office to meet with him. : _ 10. Maheu opened the conversation by announcing that he had been selected to be the star performer on a planned TV hearing © which is scheduled to open within the next few weeks. He went on to give the basis for this statement tn the following detail. When he first talked to Ed Morgan of the possibility of his being subpoenaed, Morgan assured him that he had nothing to be concerned about inasmuch as he was a very close friend of Senator Long's personal attorney who had considerable influence upon the Senator. The lawyer resides in St, Louis, and he suggested that they beth go out and solicit his assistance. After the presen- tation of the facts, all three flew to Washington where the lawyer secured an appointment with the Senator. Mr. Bernard Fensterwald was in attendance at the meeting. He identified himself as the Chief Attorney for the Committee, According to Maheu, Fensterwald made it clear that Maheu was their ace in the hole and without him the Hearings would have no appeal. He implied that Maheu's clients and their opposition added EVES uy SEGRET Cet ta, : mot - 14-00000 fey 0 BYES OWLY 6 up to a very attractive package. Such headliners as Niarchus, Onassis, Dave McDonald, and Howard Hughes are hard to come by. Fensterwald further referred to Maheu as the type who employed the technique of cutting the Government in just enough on his touchy operations to permit him to hide behind their akirts tf he were caught. It is the opinion of the lawyer that, unless the Senator can be convinced to the contrary, he will proceed with plans on schedule. 11, Maheu's most active account and, at this time, almost exclusive client is Howard Hughes. in the past he did considerable work for Dave McDonald, former president of the United Steel Workers, So far as this office knows, the Agency never had any: interest in either of these clients. However, it should be noted that the IO Division was granted a Covert Security Approval on 4 June 1959 to approach Maheu and advise him of the Agency's interest in international labor. Maheu claims he never became involved in any "bugging" operation for either of thease accounts. . 12. It is not believed that Maheu wants or expects us to front. for him in the Onassis tap matter. As mentioned previously, to our knowledge this was not Agency sponsored. However, if exploited, it would probably eventually lead to exposing our part in the Onassis/ Niarchus feud. As it is a matter of court record, it could not be denied nor buried. Even though the details might be protected by a declaration that it involved classified operational information, it would set up a field day for the press and critice of the Agency. : 13, Mr. Maheu is presently furnishing cover for a DODS staff . agent in his Washington, D. C., office. In this connection, two of Maheu's employees have been cleared and witting. Other clearance actions noted were: CSA granted FI/Plans, Cover Division on 30 August 1954 for use under LPHIDDEN; CSA issued to NE, Division on 7 October 1959 for Maheu's use in the United States and(Jordan ) ag inasmuch as he may be employed by(the King of 3 ordan| to handle G ordanian public relations in the United States. 24 SEGRET J 4.00000 he a 4 EYES ONLY 14. In 1958-59, Maheu was used by the FE Division in two sensitive operations targeted against Sukarno. Mr. Allen Dulles was aware and approved of these operations, Mr. Joseph Smith who was then Chief/PMI, is knowledgeable of the actions. 15. While none of our interests in Maheu relate to wire- tapping, it ia evident that the extensive and diversified use of him makes us vulnerable to exploitation should he be interrogated in depth regarding hie activities. 16, Mr. Maheu is maintaining a cooperative attitude and has promised to do all in his power to protect the Agency from embarrassment or compromise, 5 sve ONLY , | SECRET. |;14-00000 104-10122-10346 [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992) Ly SENDER WILL CHECK CLASS ATION TOP AND BOTTOM [| _uNCtassiFieD [ [ CuNFIDENTIAL CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP NAME AND ADDRESS | [action _—s«|_-_—=*([ DIRECT REPLY | |PREPARE REPLY _| | [approval ss] =- DISPATCH |_| RECOMMENDATION _ | [comment | S| FE, SCCs| SS RETURN | ___[concurrence —s|_—s{ tNFonmation [| {SIGNATURE Attached are copies of summaries of our operational involvement with Maheu. In Helms the originals, addition to giving Mr. Ihave also given copies to Mr. Houston. FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHO A | _sare__ Director of Security ¥ 6/20/66 CONFIDENTIAL [ _[ SECRET (40) UNCLASSIFIED Form, wo, 937 Use previous editions 14-0000 . oe, ere SUBJECT: Project HARPSTAR. 1. May 1958 - FE Division initially contacted Director of © Security and briefad him on Project. Basically, Project capitalised on President Sukarno's weakness for women, especially Caucasian. Because of our inability to get controlled asget close to him to deter-+ mine his thinking and plans, and the recent. apparent success of - Soviets use of 2 woman, believed he may let down guard and become expansive in discussion of plans with « female and accept advice that ha would not ordinarily accept from a man. 2, Object - Locate inteNigent, attractive, smotionally stable, and trustworthy female who would accent assignment which would involve eventual intimate relationship with Sukarno. 3. January 1958 - Gave Robert Maheu assignment to locate candidate. He advised that a prominent : attorney and ‘man about town, " : » could come up with a qualified : woman. Maheu told Sige be had a "client" whose business vIAS not prospsring in an unidentified country. Felt could improve situa- tion If an attractive and intelligent female could get to him ane, through feminine charm, persuade his thinking in a mora favorable dizection. A. RB was investigated with favorabl+ results ang siven CSA ca 2 July 1953, but not made witting of CIA interost, 3. Candidate - Sie, a well-to-o widow, voximutely 35 years old, resident ot FRB. consivercd ly intelligent and extremely attractive. 4. August 1938 - Project HARPSTAR plan concurred in by | CGPS and DCL re —< wg) rd oD Pe] ety oe | 14-00000 Page 2: 7. August 27 - Joseph Smith, FE Division, introduced to Maheu as Joseph Sims. 8. Smith emphasized neod for 2 solid cover story and back- stopping. Maheu suggests, in view of Daim close ralationship with movie colony, may induce SR, who represents several Tmovie interests, to set up an arrangement that would also include necessary funding mechanisms. . : 9. September 23 - Maheu and O'Connell, Security, met with CER in New York City (Hampshire Houss), Agreed, if he co- operative, would briaf him re Agency interest and objective of Project to get maximum effort from him. He responded enthu.« Siastically and offered his completa Service and facilities to sat up a Secure cover mechanism. He suggasted that BEND be told of general Governrnent interest (not CLA) at the outset due to her sharp pereuptiveneass which may cause her to speculate at a later date, 10, Cover Story - See would commissicn her to perform an "on location survey" in certain FE areas for tha proposed ‘iimiag of "Journey to the Center of the Earth." This could be done very naturally because Sete : y has the ralghts to the film and is contempla ing shooting it in near future, 11, September 23 - @igiearrived New York City (St. Regis), Maheu met her alone for first time and told her of Government inter- ast. She seemed to be relieved about certain misgivings she had of assignment. (She knew true identity of Maheu, having been introduced to him socially by Quit. She also knew that he had a personal relations organization. } 11, Seotember 23 (afternoon) - Maheu introduced "Sims" to Tam. “es given a gractual bristfing on assiznmoni, determining at various points whether she was still interested. She indicated sha sniorstood oxactly what was expected of her ind coul! leave ccantry in $3 2sys.. : . Fi 13. September 21 + "Sims! again met with o@gmiat which time she wi3 told she would ba accompanied by a femal- traveling com- Pinion, <g@igteieptenamesmss, (Emm Rmn. mt GS-12). Would ostea- sibly be her Secretary, but would be, in fact, the erraon she would luok to for directicn, VES ONLY yes aenth 14-00000 “t . (co MAUR EVES BLY Page 3 4. Se subseguenatly given several briefings by FE per- sonnel, beth in New York City and California. All under aliases. P.O. boxes and sterile phones were set up for communications, 15, Cover arrangements were completed by Gye He. arranged for Sisto carry a letter of introduction frorm; Gai Mates to a SE, his representative in Indonesia, QB known to Sukarne. Also arranged to have funds placed in the Indonesian branch of Twentieth Century Fox in DJ ARKARTA, 12 AAA det men anmmnae am ee cee A ce eee ee ee a © 14-00000 16, Records of this Office do not reflect any of the activities of SG during the courae of har mission, It is believed she left for Indonesia sometime in Jamary 1959. It is known that she did meet Sukarno, but dua to unfortunate timing that had him leaving his country on official business, sha had little time to cultivate hin; consequently, the purpose of the mission was not fulfilled. It shonld be noted that Sukarno took sufficient notice of her that during an wa- official visit to the United States in June 1959, he expreased a strong desire to see her and did. 17. The last known contact M@@Behad with the agency was in the form of a telephone call on 12 April 1961 whan she called on the sterile line and talked to Hugh Tovar, who she mew as George Henry. She advised that 2aG@@iswinigetes asked her to give a party for Presi- dent Sukarno who would be in Los Angeles on 21 April 1961. She wanted to know whether Henry's people were interested in sponsar- ing this party. A negative response was given. 18. It is not known where she is or what her activities are at the present time, but presumably she is still in the Los “ngales area, vs Dyer) woes a ee ae al ny PROJECT NORFOLK ob In connection with the, ictal State visit toting Hussein) from 16 " Maral (gs9)thru 18 April 1959) the Office of Security was requested to render special support during the Los Angeles and New York phases of the tour. : o3 o% 2. According to W=A)p rsonnel, Messrs, fforman Paul, (Frea LaTrashj and William Armd, the Subject was particularly esirous of female Vompanionahi during his Los Angeles visit, and it was requested that appropriate arrangements be made through a controlled source of the Office of Security, in order to insure a : satisfied visit. In addition, other supportive service, such as car rentals, living accommodations, etc. were required and authorized under (uma) Division Project NORFOLK, ot 3.4 On 3 April (1959) _Mr._ Robert Maheu was asked to arrange a party for King Husseip at Los Angeles, California, He did this through Mr. aaggeeteinaes, a prominent attorney and $YMBESE ficure previously granted a CSA for use by FE Division. By prearrangement, during the course of this party, » Ging Hussein, 26 was introduced to a part-time Gg’ anda = For the dur; tion of (King Huasein)s stay in Los Angeles, 3 April thru 7 April (1959) he and RRS became, penmse friends. Accordingly, it was indicated by Mr. (Fred La rash,)who was integrated into the Stata party, that (King Hussein)desired to con- tinue his friendship with Gegpiapineeedeny ind that he wished to meet with her during his stay in New York City from 14 April thru 18 April (1959) 4. Because of the publicity ( that had attended the relationship between caepimititiiowra nd (King Husssin)in Los Angeles, the Office of Security was requested by (NEA) — to facilitate the arrange- ments for the visit in New rn City. 5. -On 13 apr (0959) a rangcimente were made to rent the home of Aieiepeiainenaeabsemmenees, : a Security Office source, at Lon Beach, Long Island, for the period 14 J April thru 18 April@959)}9 as a confidential meeting place fo and(King Hussein, 06 At the same time, a was registered at the Hotel Barclay, lll East 48th Street, New York City, under the name of Mrs, Gaeanipigiegaamm of El Paso, Texas. The publicity touching i : ‘ t : on. the relationship became more pointed, some public mention had been made of the @puie@backpround of* : and thus it became increasingly important that the New York meeting be carefully arranged, A (os 6. On 14 April (1959,) Mr. (Frea LaTras))and quudiiebitiame, after appropriate security arrangements, were transported to Long Beach, Long Island, where the residenca 0 f@0QRAaRe eee petites was taken over as the meeting place between king Hussein)and wimiiessee Later the same day,. by prearrangement, -two Devartment of State Security Agents, a New York City Police Lieutenant and ol a hired chauffeur arrived with King Hussein) ais emained at the site thru 18 April &959) and(ing Hussein)and party visited each evening, remaining for about four to five houra. 7. During the stay at the Long Baach site, ¢@ ee discussed the publicity in the case at soma length with the Security representative. She speculated about the possible sources of certain personal information that she felt had beep leaked to the presa, She spoke of her depth of feeling for (King Hussein) and commented on how Mr. poe initially sought her out to serve as a party companion for(the King) At the time, she said she was unclear as to just what part Mr. gifts wanted her to play and in attempting to clarify his request, @RQMSEGR said, "I am employed oy the CIA. We want you to go to bed with him, " @@RRMBSUS continued to say that she rejected the proposal, but finally went to the party 06 and that it developed that the relationship between her and(King Hussein) transcended what had been suggested. 0G it 8. Followjpg the departure of(King Hussein) for Gord at the request of(NEA)Division, the Cffice of Security assisted in arranging meansof communication betyeendgenesass the oF King.\ From May (1959 thru October(1960,) the Security Office assisted the(N=&. ivision in the handling and examination of personal correspondence betweenspeegeity and Gh King.) The last-recordad action by the Security Office in this case was 10 October (1960, i . - . : 0 9.° All personal contacts by Security representatives in the case were under alias and implied State Department affiliation, - 10, There is no record or indication in any of the files in” this case that involves Robert Maheu by name or reference. Maheu, as we understand it, never was introduced to Sai and, as far as 2 Sid ABEL .f 14-0000 4 can be determined, “pigs "fronted" for all arrangements, ll. Security Office investigation conducted variously from 25 May through 17 September, (1959 Of Sepa reflected no subs stantive derogatory information germane to the case. t i { ! i a * “Vnied Cary, Bers onal WeAanmerk toy ASLeOWS Fam VEER NLM oy TOT Qo geek BWARESTRAS and “Progecs NORCO;“Hoa. 10122-10405). | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | CABLE SECRETARIAT, DISSEMINATION 44 ‘SIFIED MESSAGE “TOTAL COPIES an TING AND/OR INITIALS - SEEN BY PERS! IN/UNTT NOTIFIED: aa f SECRET oy A -| CL Unentitted my meas [2 Uf T 7 _ st VK _TyI _ moex: O ves D no : . . z CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. we BY: AT SS REPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PROHIBITED ADVANCE COPY im ISSUED C SLOTTED NS pe QE FAS Orssem wv Zoe rice RID LJ Ret. TO eranch L) vestroy L] sic. ACTION NFO: SY ln con |, = Ay 3] CoC Bh Y Rds X-C- 2 #3) Cz, Cxhps, Sante ae SGo, crf Ps | ON dider st N56 8 11 SECRET 2415492 JUL 68 CITE JMGOBRA 0382 Vii DIRECTOR , ane Dor wed) 1wFo (Po AU PRINCE) A — af fe, cA bal 5432-7 N LS ph REFS: A. GANTO Doni NG0y5 987 Vv nl— | zl-] sszdy B. (SANTO DOMINGD 5912 /- DIRECTOR 18614N4-— (SEcEN) cwxo ALSO FORMERLY (ensHaM-1) IS PARTNER OF PARA 7 REF A COMPANY WHICH WE UNDERSTAND IS LEGITIMATE ENTERPRISE TO EXPLOIT HIS EXTENSIVE CONTACTS IN DOMINICAN MILITARY FOR BUSLNESS PURPOSES. Gecen ap SOME CONTACT WITHCFATHER sestees AT LEAST i, PERIOD BEFORE HIS y RMINATION BY JMWAVE IN AUGUST 66. No (SECEN) CONTACT WIT CBasEUX_ KNOWN BUT JMCOBRA NOT KNOWLEDGEABLE HIS RECENT ACTIVITIES. 2? ob Zo Jy A HAS NO Tao(see) CURRENTLY IN CONTACT | @ HIGHLY umreety(secewcunne yy DEALING WITH “nasrehath. Oo ALSO COMMENTS (SECENDIMPRESSED HIM AND OTHERS AS HIGHLY COMPETENT TOUGH PROFESSIONAL SOLDIER AND IF INVOLVED fr hes, SECRET 14-0000 © a«GLASSIFIED MESSAGE Total Copies * ROUTING AND/OR INITIALS - SEEN BY © SECRET nr oun LA (When Filled In) ommenone wo BR HE CABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION PE SCN/UNIT NOTIFIED SEES ADVANCE COPY C] ISSUED C] SLOTTED By: DECLASSIFICATION REPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PROHIBITED BE .—$—_ g o wore D ves 0 no es Cc) CLASSIFY TO FILE NO. X-REF TO FILE NO. Fite RIO [JRer. to srancy C) vestrov [] sic. DISSEM BY PAGE 2 JMCOBRA @382 SECRET IN OR LEADING TROOPS IN INVASION ATTEMPT HAITI COULD BE EXPECTED MAKE MUCH STRONGER SHOWING THAN PREVIOUS COMIC-OPERA ATTEMPTS. 3. SY MANDEL PROBABLY IDENTICAL WIT FORMER OWNER CRAZY AMERICAN BAR HAVANA WHO NOW SHIP CAPTAIN REPUTED BE ENGAGED SMUGGLING AND OTHER ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES IN CARIBBEAN. NO LOCAL WOBONE TRACES MAC DONALD AND CARTUS. SECRET BT SECRET * 9;joann [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | i w * ° t 23 June 1976 MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Security Analysis Group SUBJECT : Manuel L. DE ARMAS SF#591 865 1. Reference is made to the attached cable traffic which sets forth the "defection" of the Subject to Cuba circa April 1976. In substance, DE ARMAS apparently gave a press conference in Havana on 21 April 1976 in which he claimed to be an ex-CIA agent who had been recruited by a fnu BLACKENHOUSE (no Office of Security traces) in 1969. DE ARMAS also claimed to have been Stationed in New York City in 1971 where he maintained contact : with BLACKENHOUSE and Richard TOMLEY (probably identifiable : with Peter L. B. TOMLEY, Washington Area Recruiting Office). Eas z 2. In the cited press conference, DE ARMAS made many ae allegations concerning purported CIA operations, such as assassination plots and a plan to rupture relations between Venezuela and Cuba. Details of these allegations are set forth in the attached cable traffic and are not treated in instant memorandum. However, interest in DE ARMAS' allegations concerning alleged CIA operations concerns the identities of individuals that he claimed to have been Agency operatives and assets; details regarding these individuals are covered in the latter portion of instant memorandum. 3. Agency-interest in DE ARMAS was originally predicated upon the receipt of a letter written by DE ARMAS on 12 September 1972 in which he related details concerning his anti-CASTRO activities through his membership in a group called ABDALA. The letter also contained a request for employment with the Agency. As a result of DE ARMAS‘ letter, WH Division requested a Special Inquiry by the Office of Security for the purpose of establishing DE ARMAS' identity, which was completed in October 1972, In May 1973 Office of Personnel opened a file on DE ARMAS and apparently went through the normal routine of shopping his file. Interest in DE ARMAS terminated when TOMLEY sent DE ARMAS a letter advising him that the Agency had nothing currently available. Then on 22 January 1973 DE ARMAS wrote TOMLEY thanking the latter for interest following a telephone call E2 IMPDET. . SEGRET CL BY 007472 % MasFennesz Dieb sn LQ : i ) ondi @ . DE ARMAS made to TOMLEY in which DE ARMAS wanted to know once and forever if there were any openings for him. DE ARMAS! security file reflected no subsequent activity except for the attached cable traffic following his "defection." 4, Regarding the personalities mentioned by DE ARMAS in his Havana press conference, it appears that several ; individuais may be identical to former WH Division assets, as shown beisw.” It should be noted that DE ARMAS did not identify any bona fide Agency staff employees or agents nor does it appear that he identified any past or current operations. It seems likely that DE ARMAS was provided a list of known or Suspected Agency assets by the DGI as part of Cuba's. ongoing anti-CIA, anti-U. S. Government campaign designed to offset adverse criticism to Cuba's military assistance to Angola. Set forth below are those individuals alleged to have been connected with Agency operations by DE ARMAS; results.of Office of Security indices searches and file reviews follow each name where a possible identification could be made. OS FILE, IF ANY, AND COMMENTS Bob DYNES : No Office of Security traces (aka: DINUS, DAYNES) regarding all variations. NAME GIVEN BY DE ARMAS Robert Bud MILES (alleged to have been the supplier of explosives used in the No Office of Security traces. + murder of Rolando MASFERRER) Lazaro ALVAREZ Possibly identifiable with Lazaro Gustavo ARECES ALVAREZ, SF#753 905, on whom a POA was requested by WH Division (JMATE) in June 1964 for use as a PM/Maritime asset; files canceled in October 1964, Fred DUNCAN No Office of Security traces; ; believed to be a DEA officer stationed in Caracas. Doug PHILLIPS No Office of Security traces; believed to-be a DEA officer stationed in Caracas. Whew Ws fen Why “leun 2 . Amer Sy & beak tn wy ig NAME GIVEN BY DE ARMAS John VALDAVIAN (aka> BLADABIAN) A. NASS Anselmo ALLIEGRO (HIJO) Justo (aka: LFONSO "El Gallego") Ricardo MORALES NAVARRETE Armando RUIZ Antonio de LEON Mario MEJIA RICARD teke: RICART) “i Cr2 mri 3 rrt i OS FILE, IF ANY, AND COMMENTS No Office of Security traces regarding all variations. Probably identifiable with Donald L. NESS, State Depart- ment.RSO in Santo Domingo. -No Office of Security traces. No Office of Security traces. No Office of Security traces. Possibly identifiable with Armando VALENZUELA RUIZ, SF#752 358. OA request by WH/3/Columbia for use as a24 PA in Columbia or PRC;} not used due to significant derogatory information developed. Possibly identifiable with Sergio Antonio LOPEZ DE LEON, SE2740 227, who was apparently used by WH/1/Mexico as a LP operator. from December i964 / to May 1973 in Mexico. 24 - Probably identifiable with Marcio MEJIA RICART, CR to SF#244 148 (Manuel Moises LAMARCHE SALAS). In June 1960 latter advised FBI that RICART was a Venezuelan active in anti-TRUJILLO activities and had visited Miami in April to buy B-26's and weapons for an attack on- the Dominican Republic; also advised that RICART was an instructor at Caracas University, was asso- ciated with Director of Economic NAME GIVEN BY DE ARMAS OS FILE, IF ANY, AND COMMENTS Development in Venezuela and : believed RICART may be a Communist. Luis DESA SOTO : No Office of Security traces. Felix MARTINEZ SUAREZ : Possibly identifiable with Felix Antonio MARTINEZ SUAREZ, SF#242 302, who was Director f El Mundo when a POA was granted in April-1961 and up- dated in July 1973 for his use by WH/3/V as a,Propaganda zy \_ Placement Asset, : Salavador ROMANI Possibly identifiable with Salvador Garcia ROMANI-ORUE SF#223 776; on whom an OA was granted in September 1960/2 for use by WH/4/Cuba as a P Agent in Caracas; files can- eled in January 1967. On PRQ listed one Manuel ARTIME, not further identified, as a relative/friend/correspondent in U. S, 5. The possible identification (by either DE ARMAS or the DGI} of those WH Division assets reflected above suggests that their names were either known or suspected as CIA assets and were thrown in with those individuals not identified above in an effort to legitimatize DE ARMAS’ claims to have worked for the CIA. It should be noted that of those individuals listed above on whom a security file exists, none appear to have any current association with this Agency and, as far as can be determined, no actual Agency operations were either exposed or threatened. 6. The above is provided for your information; no further action in this case appears necessary. Michael E. Schneeberger Security Analysis Group;te Ces SreLassiricavion EE Se . REPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PROHIBITED Bae 7 - novancecory [o] wsueo [_] stove aoe j 14-2000 104-10123-10017 [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | CaBie SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION ; _CLASSIFIED MESSAGE TOTAL COPIES AB. souTits haven iniTiats,- SEEN BY } PERSON/UNIT NOTIFIED * Grouet ‘To A Te (When Filled In) berectusvs yee rl Lote twoex: O ves 0 no “Ts ev: ax: z CLASSIFY TO FILE NO.. X-REF TO FILE NO. . DISSEM sv 2 ree s fire nip Deer. ro erancHL) oestroy (] sic. ACTION INFO: “er a [_Jaio copy FILE.VR. AVA D2OP?, ADPLF : Asfos ad ce oF, S§EC RET 1510472 MAR 69 crre(zuRFoR) 1629 ap, \S DIRECTOR InFo [BERN rsa “dd 69 INI5450 REF DIRECTOR 83209 -- = 1. NAGELL LAST APPEARED AT ZURICH CONSULATE MORNING : Ly FE 7 MARCH AND STATED THAT IF HE RECEIVED NO SATISFACTION BY FIVE O‘CLOCK THAT AFTERNOON HE WOULD “CARRY ouR HIS THREATS. . AND EXPOSE US GOVERNMENT ON RADIO, TELEVISION AND IN THE. PRESS. . ; . 2. HE THEN DISAPPEARED, vorvane rugrien wtneo #0 HIM AND» NO PUBLIGITY GIVEN. MORNING MONDAY 10 MARCH CONSULATE ZURICH ADVISED BY TELEPHONE FROM US CONSULATE BARCELONA THAT NAGELL HAD APPROACHED THEM AND MADE SIMILAR THREATS. 3. FILE: 201-746537. SECRET RETURN TO CIA Background Use Only Do Not Reproduce SECRET , | Z/RR;14-2000 104-10123-10018) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | FQUTING AND/OR | HITIALS - SEEN ae . g ‘TOTAL Gortes., HES el _ mo: MARY KOUREMBIS [2 | Of wt. E/AS/S pa tPF x: 7963/9108 are: 12 MARCH 1969 —— CG inoex ] wo invex DD aetunn to (classification) . {date and time ted) SECRET _ Gly 1S-14¢ ae rn oes) a ana fiver Be “BILE: 201-746537 So END oF MESSAGE - ‘RETURN TO GIA © ” Background Use Only .. Do Not. Reprocyes . COORDINATING orricers;‘toa 10123-10019) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | ye AY 03 avo: [JERRY SEIGEL| * om pit: E/AS/S x: 7963/9108 wrt: 5 MARCH 1969 ABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION O woex J no invex CO return to ie ven Soe. « 402) fF me mes Fie No. _201-746537 | — SONF: {clasalfication) PRIORITY - ane cad N75 -\0.- INK MHORDER ‘WOMUSE - A. * wuRT a) 610 (IN 03310) B, (BERN) 4908 (IN o7i82) 7 15a 1.. INFO REF A PASSED ‘LNERGO. 28 | FEBRUARY, 1969, FILE SUBSEQUENT DIRECTOR 06625 emee caper mee ser a 2.0 “SUBJECT HAS NEVER HAD ANY. 3. EARLY 1958 WITH 441ST cIc DETACHMENT. , . WAS RELIEVED cre ‘DUTIES IN APRIL 1958 ‘DUE MENTAL INSTABILITY AND’ CLEARANCES “REVOKED. LNGOLD REQUESTED WOFIRM TRACES oN SUBJECT AND ‘REFERRED TO LNERGO. ar PRESUME THIS REQUEST. STEMS FROM HIS APPROACH. AMCONGEN ZURICH ‘JUNE, 11968 AND Der LED INFO ALREADY KNOWN CONSULATE, “° . RETURN WIOCIA * # ERN)\Prss[zuRicH\whed CoB RETEM Se "Background Use Only - Ss ’. san 201- 746537" . Bo Not Reproduce =D oF MESSAGE -_ Mpa, vege cos CAE uw eweae;14-001 1000 104-10123-10020) +y ° | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | —_—_— BR WILL CHECK CLASSI. ATION TOP AND BOTTOM UNCLASSIFIED * CONFIDENTIAL %4 OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP , NAME AND ADDRESS INITIALS - [3 ° K FOLD HER} TO RETURN TO SENDER Y-3-6F = [2] SECRET | FORM a. 237 Use previous editions (40) RETURN TO CIA Background Use Only Do Not Reproduce 14-00000 * = Case SC YeTsRar DISSEMINATION “CLASSIFIED MESSAGE Tota Copies we AND/OR INITIALS - SEEN BY yy TF NOTRIES _ ENON FNOTITIED SECRET west 1 VOC fol 4 Lotte SxcAsoes eo goTowaric oT ; (When Filled nj > tortie we [a] naa mamma st aL ry ADVANCE copy KK] ISSUED [_] stores oO o CSio woes OD ves 1 no BOS BREE ev_—T oI 2 SEASSIFY TO FILE WO, DO wy ENCE X-REF TO FILE NO. Neva = 1D) Ni} OISSEM a Ld FILE m0 Oner TO erancn] oestroyv (J Sic. ACTION CO RID copy INFO: . RG FILE. VR. LAK bee PANY os IND (\ ) efS Z cu elg Al OE Ty | - 4 FOS SB 4 ee: nM eS FER CGP Val O33/0 — SECRET 2887512 ore(Zuere B40 PRIORITY DIRECT aR, (BERN) INK MHORDER W G4 USE REFS A, DIRECT oR o6625 UNE 19% B, (eur iea 1331 ( asqssyN le COQVSULATE WILL BE REPORTING ON VIA STATE CHANNELS ON VISIT TO CCVSULATE 27 FEB OF RICHARD CASE NAGELL, AKA JOE CRAMER, JOE CRANE, ROBERT C. NOLAN 261-746557. HE WAREAP INTERVIEWING CONSUL THAT UNLESS PRGIISES MADE TO HIM BY US OFFICIALS WERE HONORED HE WOULD REVEAL TO THE PRESS ENTIRE STORY OF HIS ALLEGED CONTACTS WITH WOFIRM AND WOULD EXPOSE INDIVIDUALS WITH WHO HE HAD DEALT IN THE GAN IZATION. 5-19 2 UNLESS AW ISED To conTmany nse) v2 AS IT HAS.IN T-HE PAST, : . LEAVE THIS MATTER STRICTLY TO CONSULATE. [Bena PLease ADV ISE. LNER-GO. Se MOST RECENT STATE MESSAGE WAS US MISSION BERLIN 2567 OF 26° _ @TOBER 68, fee SECRET HEL? Zo SECRET . ' 5/68;14-2000 104-10123-10022 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | _ og t -- _ aed oe ee ni > . oa te I- SECREL cancris unmune . — es rs re (When Filled In) bemetanue 0 2 j7{ a REPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PROHIBITED 2 sf [Azsveo, stortes | ves nw 4} eT [s] Fa Plot 7 pissem ey___5__rer « rice wD Lrer. to prancn (3 ADVANCE £OPY . f° fu eve, lA at: /be é z CLASSIFY TO FILE NOW X-REF TO FILE NO.. ; vestroy LJ sic. ACTION INFO: [_]rto cory . MA FILE. VR. f AN DD ADE q t ol, eA YY Z ALL CASE ROP cosh a . ya wy Wa {rw eg ET 6517262 MAR» oo cite i [BERN |4908 by PRIORITY DIRECTOR INF o[ZtR Ic INK MHORDER W1USE REFS: Ao DIRECTOR B6625, 10 JUNE 68 iB feubie? Disiol 2 33/0) a to ON 5 MARCH SUBJ AGAIN CONTACTED ZURICH CG. ND IN. BVEN MORE THREATENING FASHION CLAIMED HE cAS RADIWIV TIME VENING 6 MARCH AND WILL TELL ALL ABOUT HiS ALLEGED wOFIRM _ GOVTACTS UNLESS HE RECEIVES ASSURANCE THAT PRISES MADE BY US OFFICIALS WILL BE HONORED. CONSIDER THIS HIGHLY IMPROBABLE BJT REQUEST H@S CONFIRM PRIORITY THAT SUBJ HAS HAD NO WOF IRM ( OTHER LNHARP TIES. 2 FILE DEFER. SECRET RETURN TO CIA Background Use Only SECRET Bo Not Reproduce | 3760,;14,00 wan 104-10123-10097| : [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | . eGR SECRET ee MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Technical Services Division ATTENTION - : Mr. Clayton Kallander 226 Westout FROM : Deputy Director of Security (Investigations and Operational Bupport) SUBJECT 3: O'CONNELL, James P. ‘ 966483 1. Returned herewith find alias documentation which was issued by your office to the Subject in accordance with our request on 6 April 1962. 2. The documentation in question is no longer needed and may be destroyed. 3. Please convey my appreciation to those responsible for the expeditious handling of this matter. FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY: Attachments: \) - + | (Gettfornia\ Driver's License a , Social Security Card A Reserve Officer's Association Membership Card (Eraveler's)Auto Insurance ID Card /msL June 1962 RETURN TO CIA Background Use Only Do Not Reproduce x 2IBR;14,0000 104-10123-10098) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | *, 66483 9 £PP 1962 MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Technical Services Division ATPERTION 2 Mr. Gorm Seamer 226 Westout Building FROM : Deputy Director of Security (Investigations ani SUBJECT 1. This will confirm our verbal request af 5 April 1962 that you prepare alias documentation in the alias indicated which will include but not necessarily be limited to the following documents: [Calirornia} | 0 Driver's License, Social Security card, Reserve Officers Association identity card with the rank of Commanier, ani an eppropriate insurance identity card. . phys: Byes - Blue; Hair - Brown; Height - 6°3"; Weight - 200 Iba; Complexion - Ruddy; Birth - 19 February 1917, Elshurst, New York; and you were - requested to utilize a non-backstopped, multiple mit address in San Frahcisco. : 3- The documentation in question will be returned to your office when the Subject has no further use for same. . 4. Your prompt attention to this mtter is sincerely appreciated. FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY: BURN it CIA ckground Use Only Do Not Reproduce 18K;rN | r ER S ACT OF 1992 “{1o4-10123-10760| [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORD Bee £ S SS . 7 4 19 January 1662 : Fon: Chief, Cover Sunport Desk - : Rotert J, iecnare aoe ae os a 3 in 423 partnents 3051 Idaho Avenus, % “ashington, D.C, #156229 A-SB/2 “A has requested secur? ty eprroval to use the above site to a a contract Agent. Approvel recommended, EATLSs }, Er. Marx Folder requires @ place for the use of "E75 "3 (1723W1) an Agent of Securi ity Research Steff. He has ohtsined permission of SAC/FO' and requests S2/2 to grant securi ty mproval, ee a. since this site is to be terminated on 1 March 1961 and : ui CACAO has advised that it is leased in alias no security TW aa : tion. can be ascertained, : scom end that SB/1 be advised that there is no securit; “i o 7. tien to the contemplated use of this site, cath ) 1’ : Sotert. Je Leonard;14-2000 104-10123-10219) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 cr . - Le ee OD ALE . OC Base, , = “y Le, . 2 a Pane a L . . . - bet. CN, wet ; . -) (Nem ; an “TLL . Meee OS 14-00000 Ty TR eo 23 FED i855 MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Support SUBJECT 2 Key Aasignments . Office of Security i. This memorandum submits proposed key assignments in the Office of Security for your information and approval; such assign- ments are contained in paragraph 2. 2. ‘The following key-aseiguments for the Office of Security are proposed for the summer of 1965: ; . a, Mr. Arthur C. Sheridan, GS-15, Chief, Technical Division, will replace Mr. James P. O'Connell, Jr. in (3-17 (Okinawa )as Chief, Far East Regional Security Staff during uly 1965. ; b. Myr. James W. McCord, Jr., GS-15, who is presently attending the Air War College, will replace Myr. Sheridan as Chief, Technical Division during June 1965. 14-0000 c. Mr. James P. O'Connell, Jr., GS-15, will be assigned to a GS-16 position as Chief, Investigations Division upen hia return to Headquarters in Auguat 1965. ‘3 After Mr, O'Connell hag had a brief period of orientation ”. in this assignment, I plan to recommend that he be pro- moted to GS-16. (SIGN=ZD) Howard J. Osborn Director of Security The assignments contained in paragraph Z are approved FELEES Date £/ L. K. White Deputy Director for Support Distribution: Original - Return to OS 2-555 v2 - PersBr, os/aurs/eufPat/ph (x6200 - 19 Feb 65);14-0000 - © AVD bY } 104-10123-10220| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | 7 2f ; > ae SECURITY INDOCTRINATION AND SECRECY AGREEMENT 7BYEMAN CONTROL SYSTEM, BYECOM: APPROVAL vo’ A special system of security and control, known as the BYEMAN Security and Control System, has been established by the Director of Central Intelligence for the purpose of providing maximum security protection to a number of extremely sensitive intelligence collection projects. Each of these projects requires a separate, special security approval for access. In your official capacity in connection with U. S. Government communication systems. ‘ you have been grante 'a ‘BYECOM! approval which permits you to perform - your official duties as regards BYEMAN projects in general, without regard. » a to the necessary separate special security approvals. Strict adherence to the! > te 7 (BYEMAN Control Manual and all supplemental directives must be adhered to 2 in the handling of BYEMAN materials or information, You are requested to read and sign the Secrecy Agreement and Oath. wh 1. In connection with my indoctrination into the BYEMAN Control System, I acknowledge my full understanding of an agreement with the follow- ing provisions: 2. & Security restrictions and penalties for violations of the 'BYEMAN Control System, to which Iam subject, are covered under- Title 18, Sections 792, 793, 794, 795 and 797, U. S, Code and Section 19 of Public Law 831, Internal Security Act of 1950. b. It is my responsibility to ascertain that persons with whom I may have reason to discuss materials or sources of “BYEMAN) activities to any degree have also been properly cleared and designated to receive and discuss ‘BYEMAN information, ¢.) By reason of my ‘BYEMAN clearance alone I do not have access to all ‘BYEMAN, information or materials but only those required on a "MUST KNOW" basis. y d. Iwill report to the BYEMAN Security Officer immediately any violations of BYEMAN, | regulations of which I become aware. e. Iwill advise the: ‘BYEMAN)Security Officer of any personal changes in my status or assignment. f. No change in my assignment will relieve me of my obligation under oath and that the provisions of this oath remain binding at all times. 2. Ido solemnly swear or affirm that I will never divulge, publish, or reveal either by word, conduct, or by any other means any classified informa- tion, intelligence, or knowledge relative to BYEMAN)sources except in the per- formance of my official duties and in accordance with the requirements set forth in the ‘BYEMAN: Control System Manual or supplemental directives. as oS - so 4 i SIGNED :;: DATE Ernést M. Kropft a oe SECRET | ;;104-10123-10223) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 st } Med CLASSIFIED MESSAGE -. ig . . . * \CTION: §=0S 2 INFO. : FE 6, 0c 8, S/c 2 Ex ECR E T 2502272 (sEAC)INFO DIR (r¥e) CITE QOKIE) 835 (Fapusto) "2 6-'7 27 REF (tac) ae1s* CLEARANCE CHANNELS TO APPROPRIATE. STATIONS. | 2! (3 os 5 ss as HE VISITING fone} xm (nm. Gn AIGYF { (MANI,) re SECRET. . | SEppET EXCLUDED Fae iutouric DOWN= al GEADING AND DECLASSIFICATION .* - DERBARUPTIAN BY ATUCD TUAM I@QHIA APEICE. 10 -DOAWIRITER 2;14,0000 UNDER THE PRESIDE pre. 4 August 1966 MEMORANDUM FOR: Security Advisor, Honor and Merit Awards Board SUBJECT : Honor Recommendation for JAMES W. McCORD, JR. The attached recommendation for an Honor and Merit Award is forwarded for your information and recommendations concerning any security measures that should be taken in the processing of this award. cA . -_ , Lor ELLIN L. BEATTY -¢ - Executive Secretary/HMAB Attachment Distribution: Orig - Addressee : 1 - HMAB Case File Son 14-0000 SECRET (When Filled In) DLS (> G : é/o 5 im DATE * RECOMMENDATION | FOR HONOR OR MERIT AWARD in duplicate) TO: on tariat onor and Merit Awards Board FROM: (Operating official) Secretariat, H Director of Security Section A Personal Data . AWE PERSON RECOMMENDED (Last, First, Middle) 2 1ON' + 3. GRADE 4.5D “YScoRD, Games W., dr. HIVE! Btige—Audid soe 58 ©, OFFICE OF ASSIGNMENT 6. STATION es /fechnical Division K [reapoarters [| rievo (Specity tocetion) 7. HOME ADDRESS (No., St., City, Zone, State) 8. OF FICE EXT.(Ifhqs.)| 9 CITIZENSHIP AND HOW ACQUIRED 6801 Floyd Ave., Springfield, Va. 4192 U. S.. - Birth 10. RECOMMENDED AWARD Wt POSTHUMOUS Certificate of Distinction [ YES BK [no 12. NAME OF NEXT OF KIN 13. RELATIONSHIP [14. HOME ADDRESS (No., St:, City, Zone, State) 1s. HOME PHONE Sarah FEuth MeCord Wife Same as 7 451-5279 Section B Recommendation for Award for Heroic Action or Accep 16. WERE YOU AN EYEWITNESS TO THE ACT | [ves | [se RRR QK( wus Personnel in immediate vicinity or who assisted in act or shared in same hazard: 17. FULL NAME 18. ORGN. TITLE © 19. GRADE 20. OFFICE OF ASSIGNMENT List any of the above persons given an award or recommended for award for participating in act: 21. FULL NAME 22. TYPE OF AWARD Conditions under which act was performed: 23. LOCATION 24. INCLUSIVE DATES | 25, TIME OF DAY 26. PREVAILING GEOGRAPHIC CONDITIONS AND OBSTACLES ENCOUNTERED Section C Recommendation for Award for Achievement, Service, or Performance 27, DO YOU HAVE PERSONAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE SERVICE OR PERFORMANCE] - YES no WG SSN 28. OFFICIAL ASSIGNMENT AT TIME OF SERVICE OR PERFORMANCE Chief, Technical Division, OS 29. COMPONENT OR STATION (Designation and location) Headquarters 30, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES Supervises the activities of the Technical Division, 0S Personne! who assisted or contributed substantially to the service or performance 31, FULL NAME ws 32, ORGN, TITLE 33. GRADE 34, OFFICE OF ASSIGNMENT MARCY, William M. Elec. Engr. 10 OS/Technical Division PETIT, Alan F. Elec. Engr. 13 OS/Technical Division List any of the above persons given an award or recommended for award for participating in the performance 35. FU AM 36. TYPE OF AWARD LLN i MARCY, William M. PETIT, Alan F, Certificate of Distinction 37. INCLUSIVE DATES FOR WHICH RECOMMENDED | 38, ASSIGNMENT COMPLETED 39. NOW IN SAME OR RELATED ASSIGNMENT Yes NO [| YES | [ no Foun : i USE PREVIOUS EDITION, SECRET a tt (er y4ann00 a SECRET (When Filled In) Section D Narrative Description Award for Heroic Action or Acceptance of Hazard: Was act voluntory? Describe why act was outstanding, and if it was more than nor- mally expected. Explain, why, and how. If an aerial or marine operation, describe type and position of craft, crew position of individ- val, ond aff unusual circumstonces. Indicate results of the act. Award for Achievement, Service, or Performance: State charocter of service during period for which recommended. (Give complete de- scription of administrative, technical, or professional duties and responsibilities if not covered in Section C; include dates of assign- ment and relief.) What did the individual do that merits the award? Why wos this outstanding when compared to others of like grade and experience in similar positions or circumstances? If appropriate, include production records and assistance rendered by other per- sons or units. What obstacles were encountered or overcome? Indicate results of achievement, service, or performance. Include refer- ence to Fitness Reports, Letters of Commendation, or other documentation already on file which supports this recommendation, 40, From early December 1965 through May 1966, Messrs. James W. McCord, Jr., Alan F. Petit, and William M. Marcy, of the Technical Division, Office of Security, spent many off-duty hours in experimentation with various items of equipment in an effort to improve and strengthen the . Agency's Audio-C “termezsures Program.z4They conceived and developed - a unique techr’, 4n (fluoroscopic scanning\which is considered to be a major breakthruugh i the detection of clandestine microphones and other devices targeted against the Agency. It gives the Agency for 24 the first time the capability tofdetect hidden technical listening de- vice a capability for which thée’intelligence community has expended large” sums of money to develop in a variety of approaches. This tech-- nique will not only benefit the security of all Agency installations: at home and abroad, but will be of utmost benefit to other agencies in the community. This technique was met with wide acclaim by the intelligence community and the Technical Security Countermeasures Committee. >u In experimenting with thellx-ray in combination with a fluoroscopic screen,\these men showed this combination had distinct advantages in terms time and effort over the considerably more expensive(i-ray 24 film and processor.) In further refinement of this technique, “they designed an innovation in the form of’ a [fluoroscopic cloth) witch has screens }) 24 x CONTINUED ON ATTACHED SHEET the distinct advantage of flexibility ovér the luorescen currently available on the commercial market. 41. ENCLOSURES (Liat individually) If orginator is not an eyewitness or does not have personal knowledge of the act or performance, attach affidavits of eyewitness or individuals having personal knowledge of the facts. wn 1, PROPOSED CITATION 2. 3. 42. “Ze INITIATED BY 43, TITLE AND SIGNATURE OF OFFICIAL MAKING 44, DATE - RECOMMENDATION wa -Aah Ermal P. Geiss Deputy Director of Security (PTOS) G/N ¢ Section E Recommendation Forwarded Through Officials Concerned For Their Information 45. TITLE AND SIGNATURE = DATE Head of 55 Career Service : Le OB See Palen A a Vig ° (Career service of nominee) Acting Director of Security LO LLE G 46, TITLE AND SIGNATURE DATE Deputy Director of Operating Component a7. TITLE AND SICNERER A, L Bannermal DATE 66 Deputy Director of Career Service 4 nus “962 Deputy Director for Support SECRET Bias teotien D Continued - Janes W. McCord, Jr. To further enhance the use of this equipment, these nen ceveloped an inconspicuous, easily transportable package, consisting of two attache cases which hold th -ray fluoro- 24. scopich\equipment, wall racks, and motor units.- This makes it possibte for an audio-countermeasures team to enter offices, residences, and safehouses without undue attention. | These men have shown great ingenuity and resourcefulness in the application and development of this audio-countermeasure. technique. Through their further efforts in package design they contributed significantly to the future clandestine use of this technigue-on a world-wide basis. This technique provides the Agency for the first time a procedure through which large in- terior wall surfaces, room furnishings, and objects can be rapidly scanned in “real time" in the search for hostile tech- nical penetrations. This capability will significantly enhance the security of all Agency installations. oo } ? on eu